Unauthenticated Interview with Gerald Grossman
March 28, 1992
Bayside, New York
Q: Today is March 29, 1992, I am Anthony DiOrio and I am at the home of Mr. Gerald Grossman, Bayside, New York. I am here on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum to interview Mr. Grossman about his experiences during the Holocaust. Good morning, Mr. Grossman.
A: Good morning.
Q: Perhaps we could begin by your telling us when you were born and where you were born.
A: I was born in Rovno, Poland at the time, it’s part of the Ukraine, December 20, 1923.
Q: When it was part of Poland?
A: Yes.
Q: Could you tell us about your parents.
A: My parents were of Jewish religion and my father was born in 1900, worked as a tailor all his life, my mother was a housewife and was born in 1902 in Rovno.
Q: And how many brothers and sisters did you have?
A: I had three brothers, excuse me, and a sister. We were five children all told
Q: Were you the oldest?
A: I was the oldest of the five.
Q: What was it like growing up in Rovno?
A: Well, I thought it was O.K.. As a child I went to school and my father worked always very hard. Sometimes day and night to support the whole family because he was the only one working in the family to provide. My life was, I would say, normal, according to the circumstances in that particular town during the Polish occupation.
Q: For example, your father as a tailor, did he have his own shop?
A: Well, at certain times he did have a shop for himself but most of the time he worked in a small town which is eight kilometers from the city of Rovno, it’s called Abarrov (?) and he worked there as a custom tailor for the people of commerce that lived in that town and he was always hired by them by the week to work and he used to move into their homes while he was sewing for the whole family.
Q: And was he originally from that town?
A: No, he was from Rovno but he used to go away for the whole week and come back to the house on Friday nights for the weekend, like for Shabbat.
Q: How did he come and go?
A: Most of the time he would walk the eight kilometers to come home or he used to take a train. That was only about twenty minute’s ride by train.
Q: You mentioned going to school. What kind of school did you go to?
A: I went to all kinds of schools. As a child, and I can give you exactly the, before I went to public school, I must have been six, five or six, I used to go to Cheder. Like to a rabbi to learn Yiddish. I used to go to a small Talmud Torah also before, and then I went to public school, which was compulsory at the time, when I was seven years old, in Polish public schools. And after I finished, I went to a special school, specialized school sponsored by ORT, American ORT, for three years to learn how to become an inspector for tailors which was only about twenty boys. Specialized for the Polish government to spread them all over Poland to become inspectors.
Q: Is this what you wanted to be?
A: Yes. Each tailor that opened up a shop had to have a diploma, a master’s diploma, before he could open up and he had to get it from this kind of inspectors to see if they are good tailors or not.
Q: So, conceivably you may have become your father’s inspector?
A: My father would have been probably too old by then.
Q: So you went to Cheder until you were 12 or 13?
A: No, I went to Cheder in the evenings after school and the rest of the time I spent in public school.
Q: Until what age did you finish public school?
A: 1936 and then I switched over to that specialized school, ORT, which happened to be that we were supposed to graduate just 100 days before the war started. No, the 100 days before graduation the war started and that interrupted the whole thing.
Q: And this was in 1939?
A: 1939, yes.
Q: So that was a public government school as well?
A: It was, no, it was a private school sponsored by ORT.
Q: The government didn’t subsidize it?
A: No.
Q: Your brothers and sister, did they follow you in going to public school?
A: Well, my, yes. My second brother and third brother were going to public schools and the little ones were not of school age yet.
Q: What languages were spoken at home?
A: In my house we spoke Yiddish. Outside we spoke Ukrainian and Polish.
Q: How were relations between Jews and non-Jews in Rovno?
A: Well, the city of Rovno itself there was, I would say, eighty-five to ninety percent Jewish and so we used the Polish language and Yiddish and we had very little to do with other nationalities except school where we used to get together. There was anti-Semitism but we were used to it and that was part of life, sorta. So we accepted it as it is.
Q: Do you recall any specific instances of anti-Semitism?
A: Well, yes, there was plenty. I, myself, before the war, my looks are not, typical sort of Jewish. I have blue eyes and not a typical. I used to be able to walk on the other side where the church was standing, the Polish church. It was called Koschua (?) in Rovno where I observed and read the literature put out in front of the church against the Jews and anything that was possible to print and make hatred. So I used to relay this information to others because it was a little dangerous to walk on the other side of the street. And that’s the only kind of a thing. I came across, myself, before the war, certain episodes like, when I used to walk to visit my father in Abarrov. I had to pass a little section where only Polish people live and as I was walking some youngsters would attack Jewish guys. The episode was that as I was walking on the street, one was screaming in Polish, “Der is Yid, der is Yid_______. That means, “is a Jew, catch him.” When the other friend of his came and said are you a Jew, I said where, where is the Jew? And somehow because of that asking the question where is the Jew, he was puzzled. He didn’t know I was Jewish and he let me go. This is the kind of things as youngsters we knew. There was anti-Semitism.
Q: Were any of your brothers accosted in similar ways?
A: No, my brothers they were younger and they didn’t do out of the house that much. They didn’t travel outside the city of Rovno so they didn’t have any experiences like that, except going to school.
Q: How about your teachers at public school and private school?
A: Well, I personally didn’t have any problems with teachers. The only thing I did have a problem was because I was Jewish, they transferred me from the school that was next to my house to two kilometers further, which was Degrabnik all the way in the back of the town. I had to walk every day to go to school, two kilometers each way, yet there was a school next door to me.
Q: Did you live in the center of Rovno?
A: Yes.
Q: Was it a Jewish neighborhood?
A: Yes.
Q: How about relations between your father and his customers? Earlier you mentioned that he provided customized tailoring for farmers and so forth.
A: Yes. He had good relations with them. There was no problem at that time, among the Ukrainian people, and my father that worked for them. He used to stay in their houses, they treated him like their own.
Q: When he walked, he wasn’t approached the way that you were approached?
A: No.
Q: You mentioned that school wasn’t the big problem, but I am just wondering whether after the 1935, after 1936 with the death of Pilsudski, whether you saw any changes either in the school, or in the town?
A: Yes. Right after the death of Pilsudski, which the Jewish people liked, there was another Marshall, I think his name was Rydz-Smigly and his government looks like change. Because as a youngster I realized that we had a lot of trouble. The first thing, I think that the government was infiltrated with German people and they made new laws, especially for the Jews. Where they made them eat non-kosher foods, they didn’t allow them to kill like the Jewish way of kosher, and I think the woman was called Madame Priestaroba that was in charge of all this business. Just to give the Jews a little problem.
Q: Did this affect you in anyway in school, for example?
A: Personally, in school it didn’t affect us but I remember there was a lot of problems among the Jews for that problem about Kashrut. They didn’t eat meat because they wouldn’t eat non-kosher meat.
Q: Did these changes affect your father in any way?
A: I couldn’t tell at the time, I was too young to understand. All I knew there was no kosher food for a long time and there was a strike against the government and the Jews didn’t eat any meat.
Q: Were you a good student?
A: Fairly good student. Yes.
Q: Did you pay any attention to politics?
A: Somewhat. I did not get into it although I had a friend whose father was a communist and was in jail for five years for communism and he was a good friend of mine and we used to talk about other ways of life. I was only studying this but I didn’t belong to this kind of group at that time.
Q: What was the political orientation of your parents?
A: Well, mainly Zionist orientated. Talking about Israel all the time. Judaism. We had organizations, Zionist organizations all kinds. There was_______________ there was Agudas Yisroel, there was a lot of different Zionist organizations and I belonged to some of them.
Q: Which ones did you belong to?
A: I belonged to once Agudas Yisroel, which is the religious Zionist organization, I also belonged to a Socialist sort of organization, I also belonged to a Socialist sort of organization like______________. So I used to walk from one place to the other.
Q: Did anybody in your family, extended family go to Palestine?
A: One of my cousins, which is my father’s sister’s son, left for Israel in 1935 and he just recently died in Israel. He was one of the first Halutzim they called them, that volunteered to go to build Israel. It was in 1935 and I met him for the first time after the war in 1968.
Q: Do you recall any discussions during these years about Hitler and the Nazis in Germany?
A: Yes. When Hitler took over, I think it was in 1933, after that on the radio people used to get together and listen to the speeches and all the propaganda they used to put out against Jews and other things. I remember as a child, as a youngster, that people were very upset.
Q: Did you recall your father speaking about Hitler and Nazism?
A: My most of the time was out of the house, which I told you before, and we didn’t have a chance to talk politics with my father.
Q: How about your mother?
A: My mother did not get involved with politics. She was a plain ordinary housewife taking care of her children and times were not good, economic times were pretty bad before the war and she did not get involved in politics.
Q: Did you live in an apartment?
A: We lived in an apartment, yes, we didn’t have our own house. The house that my mother had when she got married, my grandmother came back from the United States and sold the house and made them move out because one of her brothers had to go to Argentina and they needed the money and that was it for the house.
Q: So you had family members who had been to America?
A: Yes.
Q: Was there any thought of leaving Poland, or Rovno, at any point for economic reasons or for other reasons?
A: No. There was no thought. We didn’t have the means to move out and the family was too big and, I guess, that was the aim to stay in Rovno.
Q: Did you know, in describing the differences between Jews and non-Jews, any differences between the Poles and the Ukrainians in the way in which they were treated you or treated each other?
A: No. We didn’t have, I personally as I said before, we used to walk to that village Abarrov where my father used to work and we had very good relations with the Ukrainian people. We never heard any anti-Semitic things against the Jews, and I used to have friends that used to play with Ukrainians.
Q: Did you have Ukrainian friends?
A: Yes.
Q: Did you also have Polish friends?
A: Yes, we had Polish friends in school.
Q: When the war begins did it come as a complete surprise?
A: No. It didn’t come as a complete surprise because, as I said, the propaganda and the talk on the radio and all the preparation that the Polish government made before the war like digging, in Polish they call it____________ ditches against bombs, places to hide. It was prepared before September 1939.
Q: How much before?
A: I would say about a year. Everyplace in Rovno we dug ditches to hide against bomb, shelters.
Q: From Germany?
A: From Germany.
Q: So the German attack was expected?
A: It was expected, yes.
Q: And how about the Soviet Union? What was expected of the Soviet Union?
A: Well the Soviet Union was not expected. That was a surprise. That was called a blitzkrieg, sort of, against the Russians. That’s what happened in 1941, June the 22, 1941.
Q: The German attack on the Soviet Union. I mean the Soviet Union marching in Poland?
A: Oh, excuse me. The Soviet Union, that was a surprise, yes. The Soviet Union the way we know made an agreement with Germany to split Poland in half. I guess the river Bulg was the borderline where they had the border, Poland was divided at the Bulg. My part of the territory fell into the Russian side.
Q: Did you see any Russian soldiers in 1939?
A: Just Russians.
Q: Just Russians. At the time that the Russians came in, I was in that town of Abarro because we thought we had a lot of friends in that town. In order to hide from the war. My father took the whole family to that town of Abarro. And some of the families took us in…
Q: Ukrainian families?
A: Ukrainian families took us in and when the Russians were approaching the Ukrainians were not so happy about that. They would have rather had the Germans come in than the Russians. Somehow I assume that the relations between the communist Russians and the Ukrainians were not so good and they were afraid for the Russians. And as the Russians came in they asked us to leave their house and go back to our house which we did.
Q: The Ukrainians asked you to leave?
A: `Yes, the Ukrainians. They didn’t want to keep us. So the whole family was walking from that town, eight kilometers, already with some Polish soldiers that gave themselves up to the Russian military, and we also walked back and as we came to the city of Rovno, there was a guard checking everyone who came back into the town.
Q: Did they give you any trouble?
A: No. They just looked at us, checked us out and see, they wanted to see if we are not bourgeois capitalist, and they let us in.
Q: So they decided you were not bourgeois?
A: That’s right, thy decided that we didn’t look like bourgeois.
Q: So your father was afraid that his family would be in danger. Was he afraid that there would be bombings?
A: Yes, they were afraid that there may be bombings or maybe attacks on Jews, so he was safer in that little town with his friends that he knew all the time than he was in the city of Rovno. That’s why he took the whole family out.
Q: Was there any destruction or attacks on Jews in Rovno?
A: Not at the time when the Russians occupied. The Russians just walked in the city of Rovno. They were attacked by the Polish army and by the Polish police in the city of Rovno.
Q: Who was attacked?
A: The Russians.
Q: So there was Polish resistance?
A: There was Polish resistance in both parts of the main streets of _____________ it was called at the time in Rovno, I remember there was a military church where they were hiding, the Polish police was hiding and as the Russian soldiers with their equipment were coming in they were shooting at them from behind the buildings and some of them got killed and then they killed all the police that were shooting at them. Because the next day, as I walked out, when the Russians were there already, I walked out and I saw a lot of them killed, police lying on the ground.
Q: How did you feel when you saw this?
A: Well, I didn’t feel so good to see that people, it was not an interesting sight.
Q: Seeing the Russians come in and take over from the Poles, is this something to their credit? `
A: Well, for us as, I would consider ourselves poor family, the Russian people that came into Rovno was better for us. We accepted them, the whole city was not so bad off when the Russians were there because of the city wasn’t that rich and for my personal family, it was good. The economic times got better for us as a poor family.
Q: So the Russian occupation was not necessarily a bad thing?
A: No, it wasn’t bad in comparison to the Polish government.
Q: Were there any changes in particular under Russian rule?
A: Yes, all the rules changed. There was a change in the system. It was a communist system and everything, they had propaganda and telling all the people that it’s a very good system and they’ll like it and it’s going to be better for everybody.
Q: How about walking back and forth, the eight kilometers, that your father walked so often. Was that safer or less dangerous?
A: It was not dangerous because most of the Polish army that was walking on that same road with us, were giving themselves up to the Russian people.
Q: How about the Ukrainian farmers that your father knew so well, did they lose their farms or suffer in any way?
A: In the beginning they still kept their farms but, I understand that later on they had to give up their farms to the Russian government and work with them as co-hosts whatever they established at that point. But personally when the Russians came in I was going to school and then I transferred to a Russian controlled school where they taught us Russian language and continued education.
Q: So you had been going to that private school to become an inspector, you went to a different school under the Russians?
A: Yes, that was not necessary anymore because the Russian government didn’t have the same system as the Polish government so I gave up the whole education that I had for that purpose. I went to a Russian public school for a short time, and after awhile I read an announcement that they are looking for students for a specialized school and I signed up. This specialized school had to do with railroad working, on the railroad, which was located in Zdolbuniv, twelve kilometers from the city of Rovno. The school was very nicely organized, we had dormitories where we stayed all the time and we were learning Russian and also specialty in locomotive work, locomotive engineering, building cars, railroad cars, and after that to work on the railroad.
Q: So you were preparing to be a machinist?
