NAME: F. L. CLARK INTERVIEWER: KAETHE SOLOMON CAMP: MAUTHAUSEN DATE: MAY 21, 1981
Q: My name is Kaethe Solomon. I am interviewing Mr. Franklin Lee Clark, who lives at 4 Lasser Drive in Cartersville, Georgia. We are sitting in his lovely kitchen. His date of birth is 9/16/15. Mr. Clark's age at the time of liberation was 29. His prospective profession at the beginning of the war was that he was a college student and at that time Mr. Clark was a part-time clerk. He is a graduate of William and Mary College. Mr. Clark is now retired, but his profession before his retirement was sales manager for the Even Metal Reel Company, a subsidiary of Goodyear. His military unit was commander of Headquarters Battery, 11th Armored Division Artillery, part of General Patton's 3rd Army. His rank at the time of liberation was Major. He shared with me that he came in at the bottom as a private and left as a Major. He was part of the liberation effort at Mauthausen concentration camp in Austria. Mr. Clark, first of all, let me thank you for going to the trouble of collecting all that material.
A: I am glad to find it. Q: This is very precious.
A: Benny Stein, whom I mentioned, is a friend of mine and he got involved a little bit in this. Sometime in a conversation it would come out, and he said, “You were involved in that?” and I said, “Yes, I got pictures.” “Oh my Lord,” he said, “get those. I'd love to see those and then pass them on.” And I looked and looked and looked and I couldn’t find the pictures, and then last night my wife remembered we had an old refrigerator down in the basement and I gave it to somebody who needed it. Right next to it we had an old chest of drawers and it came to her mind, I bet that stuff is in the chest of drawers. So we went down and looked in a couple of waste baskets, and here was all this stuff, where she had hastily put it in there, and I was so tickled to find these pictures. I don't have as many as I’d like. There is a picture I took of the interior of the camp.
Q: Let me start with a few questions first and then we'll be able to use those pictures to refresh your memory. How did you find out about this camp?
A: One of my good friends is Major Bousch who was in charge of the division of Military Police. The minute that the Infantry got there and took the place over it was turned over to the M P's immediately to handle. He called me on the radio and he said, “You won't believe this, come down here and take a look at this.” He told me where it was, so I hopped in a jeep and went down.
Q: That was a personal call?
A: From this Major who took it over. Q: Were you the only one he called?
A: I can’t say for sure. I know that I’m one that he called. I am sure that he reported it right into Headquarters and to the medical people, etc. because the whole Corps, not just the Division -- all the medical officers, the doctors, and corpsmen, and the technicians, and everything -- were immediately sent down there, because of course typhus was a big fear, and there were stacks of bodies that had not been buried.
Q: Their information about the camp then was gotten because somebody happened to stop along. [Unintelligible].
A: To my knowledge there was no previous...we were just advancing. An Armored Division clears the road to the ditches, then the Infantry comes on behind and cleans out the woods, because we have to stay on the roads because we have these big vehicles. Combat Command A of the 11th Armored Division, which was commanded by General Holbrook, was the one that actually had that sector and discovered the camp. He is unfortunately dead now, but I kept in contact with him for a number of years after he retired from the service, but he was a fine gentlemen. Anyway, as soon as that happened, they brought in supplies and food and what clothing they could gather because they had both men and women in this camp.
Q: If you were to take yourself back to that t ime.... A: We are going back, you know, almost 40 years.
Q: That's a long time, and certainly not the easiest time to go back to.
A: No. As a matter of fact, when I sent these pictures to my wife, I told her to look at them so she would see what was going on, but then burn them because I didn't want them around. I didn't even want to be reminded of it.
Q: And that's why we so appreciate your willingness to review that part of your life.
A: I haven't talked about it for years and years.
Q: Is that right? If you think about that time you entered that camp. What did you see?
A: When I got there, this gate was open and controlled by the Military Police. This was the main gate.
Q: I see.
A: It was swung back. It was open. Q: A wooden door?
A: Yes, that's right. Heavy wooden door. I walked in and the first thing that I saw was this on one side of the camp.
Q: Are these pictures labeled on the back?
A: No, they are not. But you can label them any way you like. Q: Is that okay with you?
A: Sure, fine, you can do anything with them you like. This is the gate to it, and I don't know what that wording up there is. Maybe you can find somebody who can read that.
Q: It's hard to decipher right now.
A: I don’t even know what language. It’s not in German, I don’t think.
Q: No, it’s not in German. It looks like Italian or Spanish. That’s interesting.
A: There were also Polish people in there. There were Hungarians in there and Yugoslavians and Austrians....
Q: Austrians.
A: Strictly laborers. Q: Slave labors?
A: Slave laborers.
Q: You went in there?
A: [Unintelligible] And here are these barracks, lines of them, and you know where the word deadline came from? It came from this notorious southern camp during the Civil War. They had a line, and anyone who crossed that line -- you were dead. And that's where the word deadline came from.
Q: I have never heard that before.
A: This is the deadline. This fence was not electrified. This fence was.
You could walk in between it, but you didn't dare touch this fence.
Q: How did you know that? Did somebody tell you that?
A: No, we found out. You could see it. The generators are here. Q: When you walked in, were you by yourself?
A: No. I had my executive officers with me all the time. There was Lt.
McCurry, who was my Battery Executive officer, and I am sure I had a jeep driver. I am sure it was an Italian boy from New Jersey named Lupinachi, which is Italian for “Night Wolf.” He was a remarkable guy. He had the best night vision of anybody I ever had seen. We could drive blackout over these shelled-out roads and things, and I couldn't even see the road and he would be driving, dodging holes. So he had the right name, Lupinachi, Night Wolf.
Q: When you walked in there, were there guards there?
A: No, they had already rounded up the German guards and one of them almost got away, and that's another story in itself.
Q: What happened?
A: A day later I was just west of Linz, along the Danube River, and there was a group of these obvious concentration camp people. They had rounded up the German camp commander and by the time I got there, it was too late. Otherwise, I would have done something about it. They drowned him in the Danube River. I could have scared them away because I had three men with us and we had machine guns and all that, but I would not have shot any of them anyway.
Q: You say a day later?
A: This was a day later, but evidently he had gotten out before the troops got there and was trying to work his way someplace.
Q: And how were you informed about that?
A: I was just driving down the highway and I saw it. There was some commotion going on between the highway and the river, and I looked down and there was a bunch of inmates. And by the time I got there, they had gotten him into the Danube River and held him under until he drowned.
Q: How were the inmates dressed?
A: Very, very poorly. Many of them naked. Q: Any type of uniform?
A: No. I walked into one of the girls' barracks or whatever it was with Major Bousch. They were three tiers high, and just wide enough apart that you could get in and climb to the top bunk, and many of them were quite sick. Probably from malnutrition and everything else that went with this whole thing. Their clothes, what they had, was in tatters, and some of them were hurrying up to cover them.
Q: How many inmates did you see?
A: I would estimate males probably 800 to 1,000 and females maybe 300 or 400. Q: Any children?
A: I didn't see any children, no.
Q: In the barracks, when you went in there, was there anything else besides the bunks that you saw?
A: There was a little room in the girls’ barracks -- and I have always wondered about this, because I didn't inquire -- like a little orderly room, a little private [unintelligible] at the end of the building that you would normally go in. And there was a young Jewish lady who spoke English there, and evidently she was an inmate that was kind of in charge of that barracks for the Germans. As I say, I didn't inquire into the story of it, of why she should be in there and not somebody else. I wondered in my mind whether she was collaborating to a degree to make life easier which could be understandable. I can understand it completely. In the first place, most of the Jews, particularly the German Jews, didn't believe this could happen. “It wouldn't happen to me, because I am a doctor and I’ve saved all these people and none of these kinds of things...” Like in the movie Holocaust. That was a perfect example of it. And it brought back a lot of memories.
Q: Did you watch it? A: You bet I watched it.
Q: When you went into the camp, did you expect to see what you saw?
A: I’d had a little prelude to it. As we were crossing central Germany, we were heading south down through Bavaria, and the notorious Dachau was north of us. And we're in the Third Army, and the Seventh Army broke that loose. And it so happened that prisoners I’d say who had been released from Dachau were heading for Switzerland, which put them across our path. Of course they were walking so we ran across quite a number of those. Apparently, as the American Army approached, they revolted against their guards, and many were machine-gunned down by the guards. As a matter of fact, I saw a couple that had machine-gun wounds that they had bound up, like a hit in the arm with a bullet, which wouldn't be fatal, but it was bound up for bleeding. I picked up one man who was an Englishman, who had gotten caught over there when the war started and somehow ended up in Dachau concentration camp. I took him to my friend, Major Bousch. I talked with him quite a little bit on the way. We could converse because he spoke English of course. And I told Major Bousch to check him out, but get him back to England. That's where he belongs. As far as I know he got back there, but anyhow, that was my first view, and he was telling me how the guards were just machine-gunning them down, just as fast as they could as they broke out.
Q: As the Americans....
A: As they were approaching. It was obvious that they were going to be there like in the next few hours or something. This was my first contact with inmates of the concentration camps.
Q: Did you have an opportunity to talk to any of the inmates at the Mauthausen camp?
A: Not too well, because of the language barrier. When you would walk into a barracks, the minute you stuck your head in, every hand would start clapping, as weak as they were.
Q: Did they try to touch you in any way?
A: Oh, yes. Pleading and thank you and all this. You knew what they were saying, even if you couldn’t understand it.
Q: How did you feel when you saw this?
A: I felt great that we were able to do that. I felt great pity and sorrow for the ones I saw, and even further as I toured through this installation where they killed them. They had a photographic laboratory, and the inmates would come in and sit in the chair, ostensibly to be photographed. There was a tripod camera and everything set up, but behind them was a canvas partition, as a background, then a hole about that big around in it. As they would sit down and face the camera, someone would shoot them in the back of the head. And there were bodies there that still had a hole in the back of their head. They hadn't had a chance to dispose of it.
Q: And how were you made aware that that took place? A: Bousch showed it to me. He toured it already.
Q: He had toured it before? A: Before I got there.
Q: I see. When you saw these inmates, did you feel towards them as if they were a fellow human being?
A: Oh yes, yes.
Q: Even in their particular stages of malnutrition?
A: Oh yes, yes. Walking skeletons. As you can see, probably, some of these look fairly healthy, but there is a guy whose ribs you can see.
Q: And of course you are talking about survivors here who....
A: Yes, those are survivors, and they may not have been in there too long, for whatever reasons. Let’s see if I’ve got anything else here.
Q: What about the dead? What did they look like? What form did they take?
A: They were just dead. Q: And piled up.
A: Piles. There were piles like cordwood to the point that they had to bring in bulldozers and make mass graves.
Q: Were you a witness to the mass graves?
A: I was a witness to the digging of the mass graves. I didn’t watch them actually bury the dead, because I actually had other things I had to do. Having a unit of my own, I had to spend time with them.
Q: What did you do when you finally reached the camp? Were you able to do anything for them? Did you give them food?
A: The medics had taken over completely. Q: They had already taken over.
A: Were taking over. Bousch was in command, and his instructions were no food, no nothing until the medics get there. They had gathered in the town of Linz quite a lot of garments for both male and female and had passed those out so that these people that were naked had something to put on.
Q: And they were strong enough to dress themselves?
A: Not all of them, no. Many of them were very, very weak. Very, very weak.
Q: Were there any Austrian citizens there at the time of your occupation? A: Not to my knowledge.
Q: Did you speak to any citizens at all?
A: I did after the war. I was a military governor of a small area south of Linz called Gmunden. Most of them confessed not to have known about it. Some admitted yes we knew there was a labor camp down there, but we had no idea what was going on. Nobody dared go near it. And it was kind of sitting out from nowhere.
Q: Were there any ovens in that camp? A: I did not observe any crematoria.
Q: Any gas chambers?
A: No, I don't remember. I am sure they disposed of bodies in some manner. They didn't bury them. I am sure there must have been, but I just did not see them.
Q: And do you remember any stone quarries or huge steps in [unintelligible]? A: No, I didn't. I know what you are referring to, but I didn't see what they had people do around there. It was strictly a flat land, agricultural area. I don’t know whether they raised food or what they did with the slave labor.
Q: Did you see any of the slave laborers? A: Oh sure.
Q: What were they doing?
A: They were just wandering around, because at this point, they didn't have to do any more. I suppose they were just trying to survive, and now that the Americans were here it was going to be all right, and it was.
Q: You went in with this Major? A: Bousch.
Q: Did you talk about it after you left the camp? A: Yes.
Q: What type of reaction?
A: Bousch’s reaction to me was something like "can you believe it?" And I said, “No I can't.” He said, “I have seen lots of things during this war, but I can't believe it either but here it is.”
Q: How would you describe your reaction, your feelings at the time?
A: Almost nausea. It's just hard to believe that man’s immorality to man. It was very impressive to me. I still find it difficult that one person can do this to another for whatever reason.
Q: It’s hard to think about it.
A: And of course from what I understood from people I talked with, they used these laborers as long as they were able to labor. And they fed them very meagerly, and when they got too weak to work, they got rid of them, they shot them. You’re no good to me any more, you can't work.
Q: Do you have any idea of what the [unintelligible]?
A: No, I don't. I really hadn't noticed at all. I had to refer back to this thing. “Liberation of tattered, starving looking slave laborers, mainly Russians, Poles, Yugoslavians and priests of turmoil. They started dancing in the streets.”
Q: Where are you reading that from?
A: That's an excerpt from Stars & Stripes. Q: The date on that?
A: May 5th, Linz Austria, by Reynolds Packard. Q: That's May 5, 1945.
A: May 5, 1945.
Q: And that was the date of liberation at the Mauthausen camp? A: Yes.
Q: Were there any smells?
A: Oh yes. Oh yes, the stench was vulgar. You just felt like you wanted to put a handkerchief over your nose. Not as much outside as inside the barracks.
Q: Any sounds or was there silence?
A: No, by the time I got there, most of them were kind of happy, because they were now going to be free and they knew that so it was a more relaxed attitude than you would normally have under a normal such situation.
Q: We have already gone over what the prisoners were doing. At this point, they were sort of milling around and trying to take the next step in their lives.
A: Yes, that's right, trying to tie things together, as they say. This was particularly true in the girls barracks I went in. And many of them were too weak to get out of their bunks, but as you walked by they would try to tug at your sleeve or your pants leg or something just to show happiness. And of course they brought in immediately the same day a whole medical team, like this M.A.S.H. deal.
Q: A mobile medical unit?
A: A team with nurses, doctors, and aid people, and they immediately started inoculating, prescribing food diets, depending on their physical conditions. They kind of had to be very careful about what they ate and how much they ate, and they checked every living person there.
Q: Did you know whether or not this medical team had been to Dachau or other camps before?
A: I don't know. It was a corps outfit. I had to keep track of my own army.
Q: Right. I’m sure. When you and the other Major went to see this, were there any other soldiers that [unintelligible]?
A: I think Lt. McCurry, as I remember, was with me. And the jeep driver.
But now later on others wanted to go and see it which I gave them permission to do.
Q: And what were their reactions?
A: The same basically as mine, but of course this would be another day. And some cleanup had been done. The bulldozers were ahead trying to dispose of the bodies, because they feared disease.
Q: You mentioned there were no guards there.
A: No. Now this was dug by the Germans. That isn't the one that we dug.
That's the way they were lying when I got there.
Q: You took this picture?
A: Yes. And it would be May 5, 1945. Q: [Reading inscription on photo] “Grave dug by the Germans. Mauthausen.” Did they also place the bodies there?
A: Yes, they were in there. Yeah. They were apparently in the process of cleaning up.
Q: Did you see them do that?
A: I didn't see them do it, no. I was told by Major Bousch that this is what we found when we were here. It had to have been the Germans.
Q: You have viewed this labor camp as did others. Were any of the men who you visited given any opportunity to talk about it in order to cope with an experience such as being...?
A: We certainly discussed it among ourselves, and half the time we were awfully mad at the Germans anyway.
Q: You were awful mad at the Germans.
A: We were awful mad at the Germans. They had been shooting at us. As a matter of fact, approaching that...this was Linz which is I'd say no more than 15 miles west of there. Linz and [unintelligible], on each side of the river.
Q: Linz and...?
A: Urfahr.
A: It’s Like Buda and pest. It’s the same thing, on each side. But anyway, there’s a string of mountains going north out of there up towards Czechoslovakia, and the Germans had dug in concrete implacements, 8mm guns, which is a very horrible thing. We had come from Passau to come in to take Linz, and we were thoroughly bombarded. We called the air strikes in and everything, but just couldn’t get to these dug-in concrete implacements up these hills.
Q: You had your fill of the Germans?
A: Oh Jeez. It was one of my hottest times of the war.
Q: You were a college student when you entered the war? A: Yes.
Q: And at that time, had you any idea of what you wanted to be?
A: No, I was in Business Administration, and I knew I was going to be in business of some kind. I didn't realize at the time it was going to be sales, but it turned out to be.
Q: What I was trying to get at is whether or not this experience at this camp had an effect upon...?
A: Oh yes, I think it very definitely did. It created in me a little sensitivity for the other man. There is no question about it. I couldn't even stand to watch anybody hurt a dog without doing something about it and I attribute a lot of it to this. Who knows, it is hard to tell.
Q: But, probably, when you think of that experience, you feel that sensitivity. Are you a religious man?
A: I am an Episcopalian. Yes
Q: Were you a devout or traditional Episcopalian before you went?
A: I was a Baptist then. I was raised in the Southern Baptist church. No, I didn’t become an Episcopalian until I moved down here. I did it because I liked the minister. Am I religious? Yes.
Q: And do you remember having this feeling before you entered the armed services?
A: I was fairly active. My mother saw to it that we always went to Sunday School. We didn't have to go to church unless we wanted to, but by George if you are going to do anything this weekend, you’re going to go to Sunday School and so we did as kids and I learned a lot. I told my kids when they were younger and my grandchildren now that everything I know about religion I learned in Sunday School. I learned very little bit in church. But I learned it in Sunday School.
Q: Did you think this experience, specifically your labor camp experience, has had any effect upon your religious beliefs?
A: That's a tough one to answer. It was a very shocking experience, and again as I say, man's inhumanity to man, and then you think about an All-seeing, All-knowing God and you have to accept the fact that there is a reason for everything. But sometimes it is mighty hard to find a reason. Whether you say it has an effect or not, I don't think it has diminished my belief in one God.
Q: Are you involved in any way in the community as far as community organizations?
A: Just things like Kiwanis. .
Q: Do you see the need for this information to be shared with a Kiwanis group or any other type of group in the community to create a greater sensitivity for this past Holocaust?
A: I did when I returned from the service in February, 1946. I was living then in Geneva, Ohio. Two or three times clubs asked me to say a few words about my Army experiences, and I always brought this in.
Q: You did?
A: And all you could get was shaking of heads, you know. Just disbelief almost. But then that died down. The notoriety of coming home -- leaving a Private and coming home as a Major -- began to die out. That was all.
Q: Did you share this experiences with your gal? Were you married at the time?
A: I was married, yes.
Q: Did you have any children before you went into the service? A: Yes, I had my oldest daughter.
Q: You obviously sent pictures home. Sent to your wife. A: I did. I sent to my wife.
Q: And did you share these experiences with her when you returned?
A: Yes. I'm sure someplace I've got the letters that I wrote her, talking about it, but I haven't been able to find them.
Q: Did you write letters concerning Mauthausen?
A: Yes, right. I had to get it off my chest someplace. She was the logical one. I sent her these pictures and as I say I told her to look at them, so she'll know what I am talking about, then get rid of them because I sure didn't want them around. Didn't want my children to see them.
Q: That brings me to my next question. Did you share this experience with your children?
A: Yes. Since they have become adults, yes.
Q: Do you remember the reactions that they had?
A: Again, the same reaction, almost disbelief. How can that be possible? Q: Did they watch the Holocaust movie?
A: Oh yes.
Q: Do you believe that the Holocaust experience was peculiar to the Jewish people as opposed to the general [unintelligible]?
A: Yes, from what I know of what happened in those years in Germany, in Poland, and Czechoslovakia, Austria. I got one picture here. There was this guy named Corporal Wartell who was a PhD. And I was his commanding officer. This is the picture. There’s a group of Hungarians who escaped from a concentration camp. I don’t know which one. But we ran across them and of course had to check them out, and then we gave them food and things to make their way back to Hungary.
Q: And these were Hungarian Jews?
A: I would presume that they were Hungarian Jews.
Q: When you went into Mauthausen, was there anything special about the Jewish [unintelligible]? Ostensibly, was there any anti-Semitic talk as far as the...?
A: No, not within the camp. As I say, this one girl was a Jewish girl who was kind of [unintelligible] one particular barracks and she spoke very good English, obviously an educated girl.
Q: So that was sort of a surprise for you.
A: Yes, and she told me some of the things that had happened in there. Q: What did she tell you?
A: I remember basic things. For instance, periodically the guards would come in and select girls and take them to their barracks for the night, which I think was probably common to most of them. She mentioned that. She said it wasn't easy to be a girl. Of course, they didn't get enough to eat, their sanitary facilities....
Q: Probably what that little girl was for too. A: Yes.
Q: How old is this girl?
A: I would say she would be under 30. Maybe late 20s would be my guess. Q: Is there anything else she shared with you?
A: She was very attractive, dark-haired, seemed to be better-fed than the rest.
Q: She was performing a service. She was taken care of. A: Yes, I presume so.
Q: There were no names?
A: I had no names. I probably would have been smart to make notes, but I
...
Q: Who knows? At the time [unintelligible]. A: That's right. But I really get incensed when I read about these Neo-Nazis and their thing about the Holocaust. The thing I remember mostly about the Holocaust...and parts of it just so embittered me. There was a scene where they were bringing these older people out, women in particular, and setting them down in a chair, blindfolding them, then shooting them. They would walk out one at the time, knowing that is what was going to happen to them. And then there was an article in Life magazine about what happened in the Ukraine where they would line them up in a dug trench, then shoot them in the back of the head so they would all fall in and they wouldn't have to have to go to the trouble of pushing them in.
Q: They had that pretty well organized, didn't they?
A: Yes, they had pictures in the magazine of it too. You might be aware of it. I still have the magazine.
Q: Did you really?
A: I am sure I do, let me take a look.
Q: If any of those pictures come up at any time, if it’s not too much trouble, [unintelligible].
A: Oh no, I will be happy to. Yes. I have a strong feeling on this.
Q: Yes I see that. I asked you if you saw this entirely as a Jewish persecution. The next question here is did it cause you to change your attitude towards Jews and how? When I say change, I don't know what your attitude was to begin with. But a candid response would be very informative.
A: Surely. A little background on myself. When I was growing up in Williamsburg, Virginia, one of my favorite people ran a bake shop. She was Rose Douglas and she was a Jewish girl. Her husband was not, but she was. She had a nephew that she was raising and he was one of my best friends. After I had finished the Officers Candidate School...I was a [unintelligible]. By act of Congress an officer and a gentlemen. But anyhow, they were breaking up what they called the CTPT Program. This was where I got this PhD, but anyway, at that time my unit was being filled down in Leesville, Louisiana at Camp Pope. They were shipping in a lot of these educated boys who they had taken off of special technical training and many of those were Jewish. I would say predominately Jewish. I would say over half of my unit was Jewish boys and some of my greatest...I’ve told you my first Sergeant, Myer Lipton, was Jewish. A fine Jewish fellow.
Q: You came from a Baptist background. A: Yes.
Q: And that's why conflict usually exists.
A: Yes, I know. But it always made no difference to me. Even if he was a Moslem. I will tell anybody I think your God and my God are pretty good friends. Anyway, I don't know that it altered my feelings at all, except it gave me a great feeling of sympathy which I still have. Look at the mess that is over there now. May be a war tomorrow.
Q: How do you feel about the State of Israel?
A: I wish our country had the guts the Israelis have to stand up for what they believe in and be willing to fight for it. And they certainly are good fighters. I think that Entebbe raid was the most classical piece of work. It was a tremendous accomplishment, and I was saddened when this commanding officer got killed. That young fellow.
Q: Did your experiences in any way change your political views, civil rights movement, Vietnam War, Cambodia?
A: It enhanced my fear of a police state and often with stuff like this mess we got in Atlanta now with these kids which is certainly a horrible thing. Yet I am not willing to say give the police more power because this thing can grow and mushroom into something that you can't handle. Argentina now is a perfect example of that. It’s a military dictatorship and police state. They do what they want to, no laws pertaining.
Q: We know that in Nazi Germany where all this began neighbor was turned against neighbor. Do you think we could ever be involved in something like that?
A: I suppose anything is possible, but I think it is very far-fetched. I really do.
[End of Side One. Side Two continues as follows]
Q: With the attempted assassination of Reagan, there is much talk of gun control. How do you feel about that in light of the question I just asked you?
A: I feel very strongly that handguns should be outlawed. Granted, it’s not going to keep them out of the hands of a criminal. He is going to get them anyhow. But it is going to limit the number of them. And there's always knives and everything else that you can kill people with, but I see absolutely no use in the world for handguns and I would like to see them outlawed. I don't say that for shotguns and rifles for sport, for hunting. But what can you do with a pistol except at target practice or kill somebody? That goes back to the old Army days that when you point a gun at somebody, you had better get ready to pull the trigger because [unintelligible].
Q: I remember you made a statement that before you went into the camp you were armed. You were always armed. You were sure to be armed before you went into that camp.
A: Yes. I was in combat for just about two years. Your biggest buddy was your weapon and you never went anyplace without it. I had a jeep that I’d had armor-plated underneath, because I had a fear of running over mines and blowing up underneath.
Q: That was a very sensible fear to have.
A: So I had them put a three eighths inch armor plate underneath it, and we were supposed to turn them in, but I wouldn't do it. I had a Thompson sub-machine gun called Chicago Chapper round...30 bullets in a round canister that goes up under the wooden stock and you couldn't hit the broadside of a barn with it, but you would spread a lot of lead fast and then I had my carbine in a post on the inside of the machine. Then I had a 30 caliber machine gun on a pedestal mount.
Q: You were ready.
A: I was ready, plus my sidearms.
Q: The reason I asked that question is because in one of our other interviews that I heard, somebody who went into Buchenwald camp said they were told not to bring arms in, and that was the first I had heard that.
A: Is that right? What I was leading up to was you would go no place without your arms. As a matter of fact, after the war ended in Europe, . me and the guy -- I say he and I won the war together -- who lives in Huntsville, Alabama now...he saw Mauthausen too.
Q: Is that right? Can we get in touch with him also?
A: Paul Gordon Chase. I’ve got his address and phone number if you want.
Q: I'll take that afterwards.
A: Anyhow, we went to Paris and I had a little 25 caliber Walters Automatic that I had taken off of a German medical officer that we captured. Apparently they all carried those, and if the wound was too bad they would shoot the guy. They’d move on. But I carried that in my pocket wherever I went. Even to Paris when the war was over. I would feel naked without it.
Q: How did you feel when you returned to the States?
A: A good example of that is that a friend of mine up in Ohio and I went to see the Cleveland Indians play a baseball game. A night game. They had a fireworks display after the game was over, but when they put on this display, Spike and I both, the first boom, we flattened on the floor, on the bleachers.
Q: How long was that after you came home?
A: This was six months. I returned in February, and this had to be like June or July , which is baseball season. Anyway, it was just a reflex action. Just a complete reflex action. As a matter of fact, I would wake up at night -- Marie would tell me. I wouldn’t remember much of it myself -- and sit up in bed. I’d been dreaming about something that had to do...and it took a year or two years to wear off.
Q: Did you ever have nightmares about this particular camp?
A: Not in the way of nightmares. I think about it periodically, but they are waking thoughts, and you remember nasty little things the Germans could do and would do.
Q: You commented on your reactions to the inmates that drowned the German officer.
A: Yes, he was the camp commander.
Q: Had you been there, what would you have done?
A: I told you how my jeep was armed. I 'd have gotten their attention by spreading a lot of lead and I would have taken him capture.
Q: The inmates’ attention.
A: Yes. I would have held them off because I had two other fellows with me in the jeep.
Q: You are talking about a German camp?
A: The German camp [unintelligible]. Mauthausen Camp. I would have gotten them away from there, and I would have gotten him and turned him into Major Bousch.
Q: Do you have any feelings about what they did to them?
A: Yes. I feel a little ashamed that I was not there a little sooner, to be honest with you.
Q: So they would not have taken his life.
A: So they would not have taken his life. They may have taken it anyway, but the authorities may have...he may have been in Nuremberg Trials. I don't know.
Q: But you didn't feel the inmates had that right to kill.
A: I don’t think that anybody has the right to kill anybody except in self defense. He was defenseless against them There must have been 15 or 20 of them in this group, and he had no arms. No one man can defend himself against that.
Q: And if you think about his position in the camp, in relation to the inmates [unintelligible].
A: I can understand that, I can understand that then. Quite likely had I been an inmate, I would have felt the same way.
Q: Looking at it from a military objective.
A: Objectively. That’s right. That isn’t the way Americans do things.
This is what occurred to me. We do it the legal way. He would have paid his price, but it was not up to me to do it. It was up to the laws and so forth.
Q: Is there anything else perhaps that I haven’t included that you would like to share with us about this experience at the camp or any experiences that you had with the Austrian citizens that may have shed some light on what this labor camp was all about?
A: Not very much. The Austrians that I got to know and I got to know quite a few of them very well, being military governor and so forth...and I used to hold forth every Wednesday in the courthouse and anybody in the whole district that had anything they wanted to complain about or talk about or ask about were welcome to come. I had an interpreter, a real nice little 17-year-old girl that had studied English in school and she spoke it very very well. Of course she knew German thoroughly. These people would come in. They had nothing to eat, and I would arrange to get them food. We had a frozen food locker. The guy I appointed as chief of police was in charge of it and he would arrange to have food for them, and we could get in army supplies. We’d scrounge around and keep things...well, anyway, I'd knew nothing, no German at all, but it started out they would ask a question to my interpreter, who would then interpret in English to me, then I'd answer her in English and she would answer them. Pretty soon, it got so they would ask a question, I'd give her the answer, and she'd try [unintelligible]. And it wasn't too long before they asked me a question in German and I answered in German. By the time I left there, I would handle German pretty well. I couldn’t read it but I could speak, could understand it.
Q: And would the conversation [unintelligible] come up about the Mauthausen camp?
A: Yes, the Austrians were, I think, in a peculiar situation in that they were occupied also by the Germans. They didn’t want to be but they were.
The Anschluss, I guess they call it. They were sympathetic. Some knew of it, or had heard stories of it, and they too felt appalled by it -- most, practically of them I talked to. As a matter of fact, Hitler's sister lived in Gmunden. She was a school teacher, and the feelings ran so high that I had to post a guard 24 hours a day around her house so that some trigger-happy G I didn’t try...because she was Adolph Hitler's sister.
Q: And how did you feel about having to post a guard around her house?
A: The first time I interviewed her I think she said she hadn’t seen Hitler for something like 30 years, and just really barely remembered him when they were children. So she had no feeling one way or the other about Hitler. He was her brother, but she knew nothing really other than what she read, or what she saw happening around her.
Q: What can you tell us about her?
A: I would guess she was at least 60. Had apparently been teaching in the Gmunden school system for her whole career as a school teacher.
Q: What did she look like ?
A: How does a 60-year-old lady look? I would say I could see no resemblance to the pictures of Hitler.
Q: What type of a person did she strike you as?
A: A nice person, a person you would kind of like to know. It was a very favorable impression of her.
Q: Did your interpreter keep in touch with her, communicate with her, on and off?
A: Periodically. As a matter of fact, that was one of the reasons. I had just learned that she was there, and I didn't want any problems, and so I found where she lived in Gmunden and I went to see her. We visited for about an hour. One of the things that impressed me was she made us a cup of tea.
Q: That felt good at the time.
A: And she had some little sweet biscuits some how she had made. Q: Was she, at any point, taken away by the military?
A: No, no, she was questioned by the military, but never incarcerated or taken under their control.
Q: And you had no more than a sort of bowing acquaintance with her. No information about her life, or background...
A: No, no.
Q: Very interesting. A: Yes, it was.
Q: [Unintelligible] somebody who’s been so close [unintelligible] A: Yes. First time I’ve thought about that in years.
Q: Hitler’s family. Most interesting. I would like to thank you very much for taking this time, for sharing this material with us.
A: Let’s see if there’s any picture you want.
Q: This will be used for students as an original source of information, and hopefully people will learn.
A: Well, I can say it happened.
Q: You can say it happened. Thank you once again. A: You are quite welcome.
Q: You said you had grandchildren? A: Yes, I have five of them.
Q: How wonderful
A: Three boys and two girls
Q: Marvelous. Have you ever discussed this experience with them?
A: Not really. The oldest one is 13 years old, and the youngest one is 10. I have some twins in there, a little boy and little girl, but I don't recall that I have ever discussed it with them.
Q: Now that we have talked a bit, if the occasion should arise, would you choose to share this experience with them?
A: Oh yes, if I think they are old enough to handle it.
Q: Because when events like this are forgotten, [unintelligible] [Unintelligible] and education is what we’re after.
A: Sure. Of course it is. That’s the truth.
