United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Adam Szymel
January 25, 2015
RG-50.030*0784
PREFACE The following interview is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
ADAM SZYMELPRIVATE
January 25, 2015
Question: This is a United States Holocaust Memorial Museum interview with Mr. Adam Szymel, on January 25th, 2015, in Westchester Heights?
Answer: We-Wester – no. Western Springs.
Q: Western Springs, excuse me. In Western Springs, Illinois. And first of all, Mr. Szymel, thank you very much for agreeing to meet with us today, to share your experiences, to talk about what you and your family lived through during the war. And I will start our interview by talking about events and life before the war, so that we can get a sense of what the world was, and what the world was for you, before it all changed. So, I start at the very beginning. My first question is, can you tell me what was your name at birth?
A: I was given the name of Adam, last name is Szymel, spelled s-z-y-m-e-l.
Q: And do you have a middle name?
A: I don’t use it.
Q: Ah, okay. And what was the date of your birth?
A: January 21st, 1928.
Q: And where were you born?
A: I was born in a settlement, it was like a village, of Berezowiec.
Q: Berezowiec?
A: Berezowiec.
Q: And where – where is Berezowiec located geographically?
A: It’s in the – 27 kilometers from Nowogródek, which was the ti – capital of the area.
Q: Okay, and in – geographically within Poland?
A: It – it’s northeast – northeast part of Poland, only about 50 miles from Russian border.
Q: I see. Was it close to Belarus then?
A: Wh-What now is Belarus.
Q: I see. I see. So, was it also close to Minsk, or Wilno?
A: Wilno was north of us, Minsk was due east of Nowogródek.
Q: I see. And what ki – Berezowiec – did I say it right?
A: Yes.
Q: Berezowiec, how large a place was it?
A: There was a – the settlement was – consisted of the soldiers that were given land, which was taken over by the Polish government after the first World War, and it was given to the soldiers that fought for the pr – freedom of the Poland.
Q: [phone ringing] I see. Can we cut for a bit? [break] Okay, so we were talking about how your family came to be in Berezowiec?
A: Berezowiec.
Q: Berezowiec. Were – were they originally from this part of Poland?
