United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Jack Moss
March 23, 1995
RG-50.030*0463 PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a taped interview with Jack Moss, conducted on March 23, 1995 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
JACK MOSS
March 23, 1995 Beginning Tape One, Side A
Question: Well, do you have things you want to start with?
Answer: Well, first of all I’d like to show my veracity.
Q: But nobody’s questioning veracity, so I don’t understand what -- what it is that you think you have to prove. I mean, what --
A: What -- what I -- what I like to do is start -- in order for my testimony, my recollections to be meaningful to any future researcher, there should be no doubt in whoever is going to go through it mind, that the person that states these things had real access and is the person he represents himself to be. Now you say you don’t doubt who I am. You still don’t know me from Adam. As far as I’m co -- you’re concerned, I could have -- I can be anybody. I could have [indecipherable] in the books. What proof do -- what -- you have no knowledge except my word that I am Jakuv Mozelsio, that I was born in Lódz 1924 and so on. But if I present you with documentation, then you are my witness, as far as the future researchers are concerned. You follow my meaning?
Q: Mm-hm.
A: Okay.
Q: Okay.
A: Okay. All right, I can start off by showing my birth certificate.
Q: Did you have this during the whole period?
A: What?
Q: Your birth certificate?
A: No, I obtained that from Lódz, a copy actually, in 1969.
Q: So it’s Jakuv, J-a-k-u-v?
A: Right.
Q: M-o-z-e-l-s-i -- s-i-o.
A: Correct.
Q: Mozelsio?
A: Correct.
Q: And it’s 4 - 11 - ’24, which -- and Rolfe is your father?
A: Correct.
Q: Okay.
A: There’s a similar birth certificate of my sister, who is still alive, and she is -- right now is out in Los Angeles with her husband.
Q: Uh-huh, uh-huh. And she is --
A: About three and a half years older.
Q: Marion is three --
A: -- right.
Q: -- Marion Mozelsio, and born 16 - 4 - 1921. Also in Lódz.
A: Right, and as you see, the most important thing, which makes me so unique, is my father’s occupation. Because without my father’s occupation I wouldn’t be right now here, sitting talking to you. This is the key to my uniqueness.
Q: Garbadz?
A: Garbadge.
Q: Garbadge.
A: A leather tanner.
Q: And you said there were what, three leather tanneries in --
A: Ba -- there were basically four -- Lódz was a textile center. We called the -- Lódz was called before the war, the Polish Manchester. And the tanneries were really a minor industry, the Lódz. There were four of them, all three Jewish owned -- no, all four Jewish owned. Three of them specialized in what they call upper leather, supp leather, one specialized in sole leather only.
Q: In s -- in --
A: Sole leather. Shoe leather.
Q: Oh, ah, ah, ah, sole.
A: Sole.
Q: Yes.
A: My father’s tannery was the supp leather, upper leather. Although he was a master tanner and he could produce any type of leather.
Q: Did you work in that -- in the tannery also?
A: No, I did -- no, I wa -- I was b -- I was born in the tannery. We lived --
Q: Really in the tannery?
A: Ah -- oh yea -- well, it was a compound that was in -- it was a -- that consisted of the tannery and a housing complex. The housing -- the hou -- apartment house was occupied by partners and family only. So I was actually born in the tannery, on the same yard. And the tannery was a -- my playground, considering that we lived on the outskirts of Lódz -- in Poland there was no such thing as suburbs, a city just gradually tapered out. And it -- a leather tannery being a smelly and pretty dirty business, was by necessity located somewhere where -- pretty far out, away from the center.
Q: How does one get the -- the leather? The -- the skins?
A: I’d say it’s a very complex process. You start the -- actually, leather is a -- they’re two separate words. We start out with the hide, and when we say hide, we mean a skin of an animal beginning from the time when it’s removed from the carcass up til the tissues are saturated with some chemical that will stop it from deteriorating or rotting. That means -- we call it a hide. That part of process -- and i -- it’s a -- it’s a length -- it takes even today with modern methods, it takes anywhere from four to six weeks to process a hide into a finished product. And the reason I say today because in 1946 - ’47, I worked in a leather tannery in Philadelphia, for two years. And the process was virtually identical. Matter of fact, the machine I worked, I -- I was assigned to, the particular machine, was identical with the machine that we had back home, there was virtually no difference. The same machine, same thing, same way, same method. So, ou call a hide all the way up to the tanning process. The minute it’s tanned, that means the tissues are permeated with some chemical, from then on it’s leather. And all consecutive stages of it, we talk in terms of leather. The tannery was my playground because there were only the Jews of Lódz resided in the city, in center city. And as you went out to the peripheries, there were less and less Jews. The peripheries were populated by blue collar Gentiles. Especially that the native Poles were a minority in Lódz. Lódz had close to a million population, something like 800,000. There was about 250,000 Jews, about a hun -- 200,000 native Germans, which was termed in German the Volksdeutsch. So the Poles were really a minority. They were hi -- and there were streets in the city, when we talk about the city, where -- apartment houses where the only Gentile was the janitor. The entire apartment house complex was part -- occupied by Jewish families. For instance, the friend of mine with whom I’m staying right now in Silver Spring he lived on Piotkowska 20, which is center city. And it was a gigantic apartment house, two courtyards, house at least six, 800 apartments. And the only Pole was the janitor.
Q: And was this typical of the way in which the groups lived, that there was mostly separation between the groups?
A: Yes, yes, very much.
Q: So you had no Gentile friends, or [indecipherable]
A: Well, well, in my case, there were on the -- to the best of my memory, I lived on a dead end -- you know, it would help us, you have that map, it’ll be a great help if we could kind of --
Q: This is the ghetto, so --
A: No, this is the -- this is Lódz.
Q: Oh, that’s Lódz.
A: Right. Now keep in mind, I didn’t make that for you, this is a --
Q: Right, right, this is --
A: Matter of fact, this is part of a collage. This is one half of a collage that I made for my children.
Q: So this is where the tannery was [indecipherable]
A: Right, this is the -- this was the tannery, and this is the ghetto boundary, the future ghetto boundary. The Jews really occupied densely, the area from Balloot mart -- market -- going this way, which would be -- this map is very wrong. This is north, okay?
Q: Right, right, so going north.
A: Going north. The center of the city was the s -- [indecipherable] is Freedom Square [indecipherable]. And that -- the densely populate -- the poorer Jews lived between Belt mark -- market and that’s [indecipherable] more or less here. That -- that was Balotte, or Balote. This is the old part of Lódz. And the new part of Lódz was centered more or less around Pietma Center Piotkowska with all -- the sizes are not shown, this densely [indecipherable]
Q: Right.
A: And this was all Jewish populated. So you see us who come out here, that was very scarce. This little street -- we -- I live on a dead end street, and our factory compound was actually closing the street.
Q: Uh-huh. And how do you pronounce that? Quid --
A: Kwizinska.
Q: Kwizinska.
A: While the Poles were very hard Polanizing, actually the original name of the city -- of the street was feesh -- the Germans named it during the 1917 occupation, Fishagossa. And then the Poles called it Walitsa Fishaira. Apparently Fisher must have been the man that started the [indecipherable]. But the Polanizing pressure came on, and everything got Polanized, so they done away with Fisher, and they -- up til ’39, a lot of people, Jews especially, still called it Fishagossa, not Kwizinska.
Q: And why is there a number one to five here?
A: Because that’s my legend. The legend is --
Q: Oh I see, I see, right.
A: -- one to five, fall 1924, til winter ’39. And then January 20th, 1945 to October ’45.
Q: To October, right, okay.
A: Because I left --
Q: You just -- you left the places in this [indecipherable]
A: Right, I left the -- I was born there, and I occupied a little of the premises til November, December ’39. Then I relocated [indecipherable] 10 in the ghetto. And eventually, on the 19th of January, when I was liberated by the Red Army, I just went back home.
Q: Right.
A: And I spent, again, th-the period between January 20th and October ’45, or when I left Lódz and Poland permanent. I was again at Kwizinska in my original home.
Q: And is your father here most of the time, or is he -- is the tan -- is the tannery moved?
A: As of right now?
Q: No, no, no. I mean, when you moved here [indecipherable]
A: Well -- wa -- what -- wa -- wa --
Q: Or maybe we should go back farther.
A: Well, what happened was the tannery was -- my father was a person with no formal education. He only attended a chaider, traditional chaider. However, he was self educated in his -- in his teens, he -- he was born into a very religious Orthodox family. My grandfather was a Hassid, a follower of the Alexander [indecipherable] which makes him a real Hassid, he made annual pilgrimages to the court of the rabbi. I don’t know whether you’re familiar with these things, are you?
Q: Well --
A: I -- I mean, I’m -- I’m talking, but I don’t know whether I should say these things --
Q: Sure.
A: -- because you know them, or whether --
Q: No, no, you s -- just explain.
A: And so my grandparents had -- my paternal grandparents had about eight, nine children. I believe five boys and -- six boys and two girls. And the boys were of the pretty independent mind, and my grandfather was a very strict person. Especially that -- back then -- we talk now about the late 1800, beginning 1900, children were considered a labor asset. So as soon as the kids reached an age of let’s say eight or so, my grandfather put them to work. And they worked for him til they reached the age of reason, which would be something like 12 or 14, and at the age of 14, they simply disappeared. My father himself was the second born, and he run away from home at the age of 14. Pretty far, too. He run away all the way 300 miles away. And he stayed away til he was 19. At the age of 19 he was -- at the age of 14 he was self supporting. He had the trade that he learned between the age of nine and 14 from my grandfather, in my grandfather’s shop. He was so good that he was hired as a expert, or experienced worker. And he didn’t come home til he was 19 where he could stand up to my grandfather.
Q: And all the boys did this, they all --
A: And all the boys except the youngest one, did the same thing.
Q: Was he physically rough on them as a [indecipherable]
A: Well, corporal punishment was normal and expected and accepted. In addition, this is the period when you’re going to look at it this way, that really Poland was feudal. Renaissance and the Napoleonic era did not come to Russian occupied Poland at all. So Poland was basically feudal. However, the Jews, western Jews and Russian Jews, embraced a movement called the Haskallah, if you’re familiar with it.
Q: Why don’t you explain.
A: Enlightenment. They felt that the future is in aligning themselves with the new era that went along with the -- Napoleon’s armies of education, of reaching for more material aims. So my father, while I guess he was absent from home, he did embrace the Haskallah movement, the enlightenment and he taught himself how to read German, how to read Polish. He read -- was wi -- he read a lot Polish -- in Polish, a lot in German. Whether it was -- I don’t think there was much choice, you read whatever was available. Even in my time, I read anything that was available. I was not particular.
Q: Tell me, did your father’s sisters run away too, or was it [indecipherable]
A: No, th-they stayed home. And then I think when my father was about 18 or 19, he embraced the Tolstoyan philosophy. He became a follower of Leo Tolstoy. As you know, Leo Tolstoy was not also a auth -- not also -- not only an author, but he also formed a specific way of life. I think there’s still a foundation somewhere upstate New York that was run by his sister -- fa -- by his daughter, sure. I wa -- I passed by Binghamton and I saw si -- a sign on the outskirts of bir -- Binghamton, something about Tolstoy and there is the foundation still there functioning. And that’s why my father, for example, ne -- was not a smoker. My father did not smoke, that was part of that Tolstoyan way of life. No whiskey [indecipherable] just didn’t drink, either way. He was not a glutton. That’s again the Tolstoyan principle, don’t overeat. Eventually he -- while he embraced it in his formative years, therefore it -- some of it, some principles of it stayed with him for the remainder of his life. It also involved some intangibles like honesty, like forthrightness. It’s a -- it’s a way of life. Tolstoy formulated a complete way of life, to lead a clean life, both ways, physically and philosophically. Eventually my father became a member of the bund, that was the Jewish Socialist Worker’s movement. And he was capable, while my father’s ancestors, that’s my grandfather, I imagine even people before my grandfather, were all leather tanners because in the medieval times, tanning was one of the few trades -- [phone ringing] -- Is this going on?
Q: Oh yeah.
A: Oh. I didn’t know, I thought we were just talking preparatory.
Q: No, no, no, no.
A: Tanning -- I don’t know whether -- a-again, you know quite a bit about me because I sent some materials. I don’t know anything about you. I don’t know how much knowledge and what areas of Jewish history is your expertise. So I’m really --
Q: You have to tell me everything, because you’re not just talking to me. When you put something --
A: But a -- but a -- I don’t know how much am I repeating myself and it sounds to you like old -- old story.
Q: No, you misunderstand something. When you do something for an interview, even if I know things, like what Haskallah is, it’s very important that you explain, because you never know who is going to listen and what they understand. So you must explain as if I know very little. That’s the point.
A: All right, let’s -- let’s make a deal.
Q: Yeah, yeah.
A: When I use a word like -- a term like Haskallah and then offer an explanation, if you know about Haskallah, and you don’t think that my explanation of [indecipherable] me stands for, correct me, cause I don’t want to sound like a fool. So if you do know about Haskallah from other sources, am I correct in the way I presented it?
Q: Yeah, I think it’s a ger -- I mean, I’m not -- I -- I -- I mean, I’m not an expert in Jewish history.
A: Well, it translates into --
Q: Yeah.
A: -- enlightenment, yeah.
Q: Enlightenment, right.
