United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Theodore Feder
June 2, 1995
RG-50.030*0335
PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a taped interview with Theodore Feder, conducted on June 2, 1995 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
THEODORE FEDER
June 2, 1995
Abstract Theodore [Ted] Feder was born in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, on February 21, 1914. His family was originally from Stolbtsy [Stowbtsy], but, before Ted was born, there was a pogrom in the area and his family moved to Milwaukee. In college, Ted’s sister Sara befriended Golda Meir. Ted was surrounded by Zionism; his sister and Golda headed a Polish Zionist group in Milwaukee. While Ted was working at Fort Knox, during World War II, as a warrant officer adjutant, he decided that he wanted to go overseas to see if he could help rebuild Europe after the war. He applied to the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration [UNRRA] and was put on a ship with 400 other men on the day the atom bomb was dropped. After landing in England, Ted made his way to Germany and was involved with documentation and keeping statistics about where people were repatriating to. After six months, he left and joined the Joint Distribution Committee [JDC]. As part of the JDC, Ted was involved with the distribution of supplies and other necessities, such as psychiatrists, to DP camps. He was also involved with creating employment for residents of the DP camps. Although the UNRRA was in charge of supplying the necessary materials, that was only the bare necessities, and the JDC was the organization that enhanced the diets and lifestyle of those in the DP camps. He met his wife, who (at the time of this interview) does research at a New York hospital in White Plains in the field of geriatrics, while working for the JDC, and has three children, a son in England with two boys and two daughters in New York, both with two children. While working with the JDC, Ted also met Oskar Schindler and gave him money, through the JDC, to start another factory in South America. In the final tape of this interview, tape four, Ted explains what is happening in several pictures he has of his time in Europe.
Transcript Interviewer: Ted, I need you to begin by telling me your name, where you were born and your date of birth.
Theodore: Okay. I'm called Ted, but my name is Theodore D. Feder. I was born in Milwaukee, Wisconsin. And I had two sisters and a brother, and a mother and dad.
Interviewer: The year of your birth?
Theodore: Pardon?
Interviewer: The year of your birth? The year of your birth?
Theodore: Must I? February 21, 1914.
Interviewer: Why don't you tell me a little bit about your family and personal background; reconstruct it?
