United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE
Archives Oral History Interviews of the Gratz College Holocaust Oral History Archive
Melrose Park, Pennsylvania Interview with Herbert Lindemeyer
December 6, 1983
RG-50.462*0017
PREFACE On December 6, 1983, Herbert Lindemeyer was interviewed on audio tape by Eileen Steinberg on behalf of the Gratz College Holocaust Oral History Archive. The interview took place in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania and is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum’s collection of oral testimonies.
Gratz College Holocaust Oral History Archive transcribed the audiotaped interview. The reader should bear in mind that she or he is reading a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. Insofar as possible, this transcript tries to represent the spoken word, but some uncertainties will inevitably remain regarding some words and their spelling. Thus, this transcript should be read as a personal memoir and not as either a researched monograph or edited account. The transcript should not be used in place of the interview itself.
Rights to the interview are held by the Gratz College Holocaust Oral History Archive. The United States Holocaust Memorial Museum houses a copy of the interview as a result of a contributing organization agreement with the Gratz College Holocaust Oral History Archive. Details concerning the Museum’s rights to use and reproduce the interview are contained in the contributing organization agreement.
HERBERT LINDEMEYER
December 6, 1983
Q:This is Eileen Steinberg interveiwing Herbert Lindemeyer December 6, 1983. Side 1. Please tell me where you were born and when and a little bit about your family.
A:I was born in Minden, West Germany on March 11, 1922. My father was a pharmacist; he owned a pharmacy which he had bought in 1921. I had no brothers or sisters. Was an only child. I went to elementary school and then later on to High School in Germany. Everything seemed all right until about 1934 when the Nazis had been in power for about a year.
Q:How was your life changed by the Nazi victories in Europe?
A:Considerably, especially in school as a matter of fact, for some reason one day just like a bolt out of the sky, my fellow students didn’t talk to me anymore. There was no fight or anything; there were some who belonged to the Hitler Youth and they told the others they weren’t allowed to talk to me, so I went to that school for two-and-one-half years. My parents pleaded with me to stick it out so that I would get my education.
Q:What years were these?
A:That was 1934 until 1937, almost three years. There was no Jewish School in Minden so I stuck it out without any one of my fellow students ever saying a single word to me.
Q:Must have been most difficult. Did your family experience anti-Semitism before the Hitler period?
A:No.
Q:Did your family belong to any Jewish organizations or to a synagogue?
A:Yeah, they belonged to a synagogue. We had a small congregation, about 150 members. The city had about 30,000 population, so one synagogue was sufficient.
Q:About how many Jewish people would you say were in the town?
A:150.
Q:That were in the synagogue, but I assume there were more than were in the town?
A:No, everybody belonged, just about everybody.
Q:O. K. Did any of the men in your family serve in any national army?
A:My father was an officer in the First World War.
Q:Was he wounded or...
A:No, he wasn’t wounded.
Q:Do you remember how you and members of your family reacted to Hitler’s appointment as Chancellor in January of 1933?
A:I remember my parents, they were very upset. I was at the time 11 years old and I wasn’t too concerned. I remember the Nazis marching and they had these torchlight parades which were frightening with their singing anti-Jewish songs, then when you are 11 years old it doesn’t concern you too much. But I remember that my parents and other members of my family, uncles and aunts, were very upset. They had meetings in our house, and at their houses, and there was tension.
Q:You mentioned before that the children in school wouldn’t speak to you. When you were home, who did you play with as a child, just other Jewish children?
A:Other Jewish children, yeah. Um hum. There were two or three, maybe four boys in my class who called me at night and said they were threatened, that they would like to talk to me but they couldn’t do it. Four out of a class of 32.
Q:Four had the courage enough to at least call you and but not to talk to you in school.
A:Four to call me, not talk in school, right.
Q:All right.
A:And I later, much, much later, in fact when I came to the States, a cousin of mine told me that my parents had sent a bodyguard going to school and coming from school because they were afraid that I would be beaten and I didn’t know that.
Q:Were you the only Jewish student?
A:There was one other boy, he was a little younger and I think he, I started high school in ‘32 and he came in ‘33 or ‘34, so I wasn’t in the same class but he was in the same school with me.
Q:I assume he was also ostracized in the same way?
A:Yes, the same way.
Q:Did you have any contact or your family have any contact with the Council of German Jews?
A:Yes, my father was a member of certain, well there was a Jewish, what was it called, Jewish I guess.
Q:Veteran.
A:Veteran, I guess Jewish Veteran School, yes. Jewish Veteran School, he was a member of that.
Q:Were you affected by the boycott of April 1, 1933?
A:Yes, definitely and not me personally, but my father had the pharmacy and the Nazis were standing in front of it and not letting any customers in.
Q:None at all, not even Jewish customers?
A:None at all. Well you could have forced your way in but nobody did and by then many Jews on that particular date, Jews didn’t go outside. It was April 1, everybody knew that all the stores were boycotted and nobody went out.
Q:What did your father do then, if he wasn’t able to earn a living?
A:He was able to earn a living, until the Nuremberg Laws came out in 1935, I think.
Q:Right. I was going to ask you about that.
A:Until that time he was able to keep the pharmacy and he made a decent living. And if he hadn’t, he probably would have emigrated. This way he said, “If I emigrate I have to learn another language. Here I can still make a living, and how long can the Nazi government last? Another year or two and we can stick it out.” And he wasn’t the only one who felt that way. There were thousands who felt the same way.
Q:During this early period, did you or any members of your family discuss the possibility of leaving at all or your father himself?
A:My mother was in favor; my father was definitely against it. He said, “There is still time, after all, this is the country of the old familiar things—Goethe and Schiller and Beethoven—and they wouldn’t do anything to us. All right, it is tough right now, but how long can it last?”
Q:How were you affected by the Nuremberg Laws, and did you think that this would be the worst that you would have to endure?
A:I personally wasn’t affected. My parents were there. He had to give up his pharmacy. They didn’t take it away immediately. He had to employ somebody who would run the pharmacy and he was only allowed to help out occasionally. Because, the reason they said was he could poison the German people by selling them poison instead of drugs and medicines. But that only lasted for, I think another two years, and after that he was forced to sell the pharmacy.
Q:How did you live after you had to sell the pharmacy?
A:This only came up in 1938, after the famous Crystal Night. Then he was forced to sell the pharmacy. Until then he had rented it. And he got a, I guess it was a fairly decent amount of money, so we could live.
Q:During the period from ‘33 to ‘38, did you or your family have any contact with non-Jews?
A:Some.
Q:O. K., what kind of contact, and how would you describe their behavior?
A:Well, some people came to visit us. We had a maid until 1936; well she got married and she left voluntarily. In fact, she, I am still in contact with her today. She is an old lady now. But people like that were in contact with us and there was a neighbor’s boy who was a little older than I was; he came to see me, and at least for another year or so. His father was a policeman and he also was forced to break off all contact with our family.
Q:But they were basically the only non-Jewish.
A:They were basically decent people and there were decent people; because if they were not, all Jews would have been killed in 1933 and ‘34. There were, I will admit there were basic, a lot of basically decent people. Not, I wouldn’t say the majority but...
Q:Some.
A:Some. But many were afraid. One of my neighbors worked for the Post Office. She didn’t dare to talk to us because it was a government job and she would have been fired immediately.
Q:What happened to your family during Kristallnacht?
A:I wasn’t home that night. I was in a different town. I went to a trade school. My father was arrested and sent to a concentration camp.
Q:Which one?
A:Buchenwald. And I got a phone call that night and I went home. My mother asked me to come home immediately and I did. And my father was in Buchenwald until December—about four or five weeks. And then he was released because he was a war veteran. He had the Iron Cross. And after so many weeks they were all released; all those who had the Iron Cross and were war veterans were released because they couldn’t have kept them forever; they weren’t prepared for it at that time.
Q:The numbers at that time. Did your father talk about his experience? How was he treated?
A:Not to me. Because, well I was 16. I was old enough but he was afraid that I would spill the beans somehow, but I heard when my parents were talking. He was in sad shape when he came home. And I am sure he was beaten. I don’t know, I can’t be sure, but it very much looked like it and it took him quite a while to recover after he came home. Because it was winter time and I remember his feet were frostbitten, and for several weeks after he was released he was not in good shape. And then he was more or less convinced there was no future and he took steps to emigrate. But by that time it was too late. I know for to get an American visa or American papers in January, there was a waiting list. The government let, the U.S. government let in, I forget the exact number, 5,000 or 8,000 people a year, and I still remember our number: it was 44,444, so I can never forget that number.
Q:You didn’t have much chance.
A:It would have taken until 1950 or so.
Q:To get out with that number.
A:To get out with that number.
Q:O. K., you said your father sold the pharmacy in 1938?
A:Yes, he was forced to. Yes.
Q:And what did you do then, is that the time that you left to go to England?
A:No that was a little later. I went back to the trade school in Frankfurt after my father was released and then we took steps for me to emigrate and I got the visa to go to England in June 1939 and then I got prepared and emigrated finally on the 9th of August 1939, three weeks before the Second World War started in Europe.
Q:That’s when the Germans, Germany invaded Poland?
A:Yes, on the first of September.
Q:O. K., that’s the time that you left.
A:Yes. Um hum.
Q:But your parents remained. Did they stay in the same town and in the same place?
A:They stayed in the same town and same apartment. They had to take in another Jewish family and they had to sell some of the furniture. The money that was paid for the pharmacy never got into my father’s hands because it was confiscated by the government and he was given a pitiful sum every month to live on. I don’t know how much but it was all that he was allowed to have. The rest was confiscated.
Q:After you were separated from your family, when you left to go, were you able to remain in contact with them?
A:Well, for about three weeks there was no war yet. I wrote to them and then the war started and I had an aunt in Switzerland so I wrote to her and she forwarded the letters from Switzerland to Germany and my parents sent mail to Switzerland and then on to me.
Q:How long were you able to keep in touch with them like this?
A:I’d say about six months, eight months.
Q:All right, how did you learn what eventually happened to your parents?
A:I got a Red Cross letter, yes I remember now, a Red Cross letter from my parents. They wrote from Riga that they were living in Riga now. I think they used the word “living” or something like that.
Q:But you understood what they meant.
A:Right. And I knew there was a concentration camp there. And they wrote that they are fine and, whatever that meant, and then shortly thereafter in, for a while I didn’t hear anything because I myself was interned in England so we couldn’t receive much mail in the internment camp. After I was released, I remember in March, 1942, I learned that my mother had died first and then shortly thereafter, my father died. So they must have died sometime in 1941.
Q:Who gave you the information?
A:An uncle of mine was in, he was in Theresienstadt [Terezin, -ed.] , another camp. And they wrote to me that my father and mother had died.
Q:How did they know?
A:I am not sure.
Q:Because they were in a different camp?
A:That’s right and it was my mother’s sister and I really don’t know how they knew.
Q:Did your uncle survive Theresienstadt?
A:No.
Q:Did not survive?
A:No.
Q:Now you mentioned that you were interned when you were in England?
A:Right.
Q:You arrived in England in...
A:In ‘39.
Q:In ‘39.
A:August ‘39.
Q:O. K., tell me about what happened from the time you arrived, what you did and tell me about being interned?
A:I got a trainee permit to work in, permit to work in a factory in Oxford, England. And I worked there for about ten months until June 25, 1940. It was a decent job. I got paid reasonably well, and I lived with an English family and I did fairly well and in June 1940, when after France, Holland and Belgium had fallen, the British government got panicky—which I can understand, many people refuse to allow that—and at least 25,000 or 35,000 refugees were interned. Men and women, mostly men but some women also. And some were sent to Australia, some were sent to Canada. Under horrible conditions. The soldiers that guarded the prisoners, so-called prisoners on the ships thought they were all Nazis. There were some German prisoners of war, they all put together with the refugees. And they were not treated well at all; in fact after the war there was an investigation in the House of Parliament in England and some officers were sent to jail, as far as I know. One ship was torpedoed by the Germans and several hundred people died. The German prisoners of war were on top of the ship on the main deck; the Jewish prisoners were not under the Red Cross protection and they were down in the hold and most of them drowned or at least many of them drowned. The ship was called the Andrea Doria.
Q:Oh, for, no not the Andrea Doria because the Andrea Doria, I remember when that...
A:No wrong. That, excuse me. It was called the Andora Star. I always get them mixed up, the Andora Star.
Q:O. K.
A:It was sunk by German U-Boats.
Q:How were you, yourself treated when you were interned?
A:I was treated well. We were, the first couple of weeks, I’d say the first, yeah the first two weeks, there was complete confusion, they weren’t prepared to receive tens of thousands of prisoners, and there was little food. But after about two weeks it was straightened out. There were very primitive conditions, but we were treated well. I wasn’t one of those who were sent to Australia or Canada. We were sent to the Isle of Man. Those people who went to Canada and Australia went to the Isle of Man first and then when more people came they were shipped out and we took over the Isle of Man.
Q:And that’s where you stayed the entire time?
A:Yes for 18 months.
Q:18 months. What did you do while you were there? Were you just a prisoner, were you given any kind of work to do?
A:Yes, we built an airport in the Isle of Man, and we got paid for that. We laid cables and dug ditches and it was hard work but at least we did something. We weren’t forced to, it was strictly voluntary. And the camp was pretty well-organized; later on we could take courses in English, shorthand, bookkeeping and engineering. We had all kinds of people in there. After all, these refugees came from Austria, from Germany. We had composers, we had movie actors, we had engineers, we had professors. Famous professors, in fact. We had very famous musicians, authors, people from all kinds of backgrounds. And you could keep yourself busy.
Q:While you were on the Isle of Man did you know what was going on in Europe?
A:Very, very little. We had no radios; we were not allowed to have radios. And in the beginning, the first several weeks we weren’t allowed to have papers. And in fact we expected to wake up one morning and have the Germans stand guard instead of the British Army because we had no idea. People told us the Germans had landed in Ireland—we could see the coast of Ireland from the Isle of Man—and there were rumors that the Germans had landed and the next step would be the Isle of Man. Of course that never happened but...we were scared.
Q:So you really didn’t know what was going on while you were there?
A:No.
Q:You told me you were on the Isle of Man for 18 months. When were you and how were you finally released?
A:The British government published a white paper which had 15 or maybe 25 categories under which refugees could be released. One of them was finding a job in defense work, which was relatively easy; after all it was war time and judges or people who had law degrees were released, doctors for military hospitals, and there were many, many categories which most of them escape me. And I found a job or I was asked by a defense factory to apply for the job. As a matter of fact, the man took 15 or even maybe more than 15 from the Isle of Man and employed them in a factory. He happened to be a German Jew, who had emigrated in the 1920’s and was of course, a citizen by that time. And he owned the factory and he, I am sorry to say, used us. He paid us minimum wages and we really had to work very hard there. Which wasn’t bad, but he didn’t feel for us; there were no promotions; we did the lowest jobs. Somehow I feel he basically hated us. Maybe he was a Jewish anti-Semite or I don’t know what made him click. And I worked there for a year-and-a-half. As a matter of fact, he, when we arrived there, the first day of work he called us in his office and said, “Gentlemen, don’t think you can use me as a springboard. You are like in a mousetrap. I got you out of the Isle of Man and I trap you here, and as long as the war lasts, you cannot get out. Don’t try to find another job somewhere else.” And that was it. We were stuck.
Q:Sounds like a wonderful fellow.
A:Wonderful.
Q:So eventually, when did you leave him?
A:The war ended in ‘45, May ‘45. And then things became a little easier as far as leaving the job was concerned. Although we were still restricted, we couldn’t just leave. So I heard of an opportunity to join the American Army as an interpreter and mail censor—to be sent to Germany to censor mail and listen to telephone calls with the Occupation Army. I applied for the job, passed several fairly tough tests, and was accepted. So I went to my lovely boss and told him I was leaving next week. He said, “You can’t do that. I told you you are trapped here. You need permission.” I said, “I have permission. Here it is. I am joining the army.” And he had to let me go. And that was in October ‘41.
Q:‘45.
A:Excuse me. October ‘45.
Q:O. K.
A:October ‘45.
Q:While you were working in this factory, with this man, where did you live?
A:The Jewish Committee in Manchester, that’s where the job was, arranged for us to live in a hostel. It was called a youth hostel, although there were older people there also. And as soon as I was released from the Isle of Man I headed for that hostel and lived there for a year-and-a-half. My wife lived there also; as a matter of fact, that’s where we met. It was in December ‘41. I worked in this defense plant until September ‘45. And in the meantime we got married and that was in 1944, the 2nd of January 1944, to be exact. We found an apartment, lived in that apartment, and after the war finally ended in May, I tried to get out of the factory, although it was difficult at the time. It was still war power acts in force, and it wasn’t easy to leave the job. So I finally heard about the opportunity to join the American Army as an interpreter and the mail censor and go to Germany with the Occupation Army. So I applied for the job, passed several tests, and was accepted, and quit the job at the defense plant and went to Germany in November 1945. My wife couldn’t go with me at the time, because they didn’t take married couples, but she was able to follow me three months later.
Q:On her own?
A:On her own. Um hum.
Q:O. K., tell us about your work when you went back to Germany. Did you work together, or were you working separately?
A:The first four weeks she was in a different location but she got a transfer and then we had a nice little apartment in Germany in a military compound. We censored mail, mostly German mail, but also some army mail.
Q:Mail coming from where?
A:Coming from all over the world and going all over. Not all mail was censored, only about 10%. There were 15,000 people working in our division. We had to report many different things; black market activities, Nazis living in hiding—we caught quite a few. We had a so-called “watch list” with thousands of names of known Nazis, either living in hiding or trying to hide and one of them, I remember quite clearly, was Werner Von Braun, who in the meantime had gone to the United States to work on the rocket program. Every letter he sent and every letter he received was censored by us. We had many others. We weren’t allowed to read the top Nazis’ mail; they had their own censorship, those who were indicted in Nuremberg at the time. There were several officers who did that themselves; we didn’t read their mail. But it was interesting work. And it was rewarding to catch a few Nazis here and there.
Q:I would imagine. You said you lost your parents in the war. Did you lose any other members of your family?
A:About 50. Uncles, Cousins, Aunts. I had no brothers and sisters, as I said, but I counted once and there were about 50 people.
Q:Did you ever go back to the town where you lived?
A:Definitely, several times.
Q:Tell us the story.
A:I have very good friends who still live in Minden. This one man who is approximately my age, his father was not Jewish, his mother is Jewish. He was brought up Jewish. He lived in hiding during the war and I immediately contacted him when I got to Germany and I went to see him and his mother. At that time his father was alive too. As a matter of fact, his mother is still alive. She is 92 today. His father died about 15 years ago. We were welcomed with open arms, of course. I am still in contact with him. I saw him five years ago and we are planning to go again to see him.
Q:I understand you went back to the pharmacy.
A:I went back to the pharmacy my father owned at the time; when I was in American uniform, of course. I walked into the pharmacy, the man saw me, the owner at the time.
Q:Who had bought the pharmacy?
A:Who had bought the pharmacy and he had known me practically from the day I was born because he worked for my father. He got as white as a sheet; he was afraid he was going to lose...
Tape 1 of 1, Side B
Q:This is Eileen Steinberg interviewing Herbert Lindemeyer December 6, 1983, side two. The man saw you and what did he do?
A:He turned white and I said, “Mr. Foss I am going into your office.” He said, “I come right with you. I am busy but I come right with you.” He followed me, white as a sheet, and told me that he was happy to see me; I doubt it very much. [laughter] And I will say he was a decent man all his life. He never did anything to my father; he was forced to take over the pharmacy. He did it willingly, of course, but I wouldn’t say he was an anti-Semite. As a matter of fact, he had some very important papers which he had hidden and he gave to me to help me to get some restitution from Germany. So I can honestly say that he was pretty much on my side.
Q:Um hum. But he was certainly surprised to see you?
A:Yes, he was. He had no idea that I had emigrated, where I was, he didn’t know.
Q:Was it when you got back to Germany after the war that you found out what had happened to the different members of your family?
A:Yes. I found out some of it in England already before I came to Germany but...
Q:Do you remember when you first heard that the Jews were being murdered in mass numbers and being gassed?
A:Yes.
Q:And did you believe it?
A:Probably after I was released from the Isle of Man, but I am not sure. There were stories in the paper, but they weren’t confirmed and we didn’t really know what was going on.
Q:Did you believe the stories?
A:Yes, having known the Nazis I believed them.
Q:Did you have any contact with any of your family or friends in Germany between 1942 and 1945?
A:None at all.
Q:Nothing.
A:I couldn’t write and when the United States got in the war and there was nobody else contacting anybody.
Q:You were alone; you were a young man alone by yourself without any of your family, in a different country.
A:Um hum.
Q:Where did you learn to speak English?
A:I had private lessons in Germany before I emigrated, by an English lady. She taught me and...
Q:Was this in preparation for you going to England?
A:In preparation, that’s right.
Q:O. K.
A:And the lady I came to in England was a school teacher and she helped me quite a bit. She corrected me and she gave me lessons and was very helpful.
Q:Tell me about the woman that you first went to live with when you went to England.
A:She was an elderly lady, an ex-schoolteacher, who was a Quaker, and she got me out of Germany, got all the papers for me. I hadn’t known her at all. She was a complete stranger to me, but she was helpful to many, many refugees. I think she personally got out about six or seven. She wasn’t a rich lady but she helped out when she could.
Q:There were some good people.
A:Yes, there were, quite a few.
Q:Were you able to maintain any kind of Jewish identity while you were in England, able to join a synagogue?
A:They had synagogues and the refugees were allowed to join without paying. But there was not too much time. We worked, there was a curfew and we worked six and one-half days or six days at least and there wasn’t too much time for free time.
Q:Did you feel strengthened in your experiences by your religious base?
A:I can’t say that. Maybe in the beginning. I was young, but as I grew older I don’t think that it helped at all.
Q:You mentioned before that you went back to Minden and you visited the pharmacy where your, that your father had owned. Where did you stay when you went back to Minden?
A:Well, the first time I was able to travel in Germany after all the destruction, the railways started to run again, was about September 1946. And I made it a point to go to Minden. I stayed in the local hotel and contacted my friend. Since Minden was a small town, and my father had a pharmacy, he was well-known in Minden, and the word spread like wildfire that I was in Minden. And amazingly enough, I would say about ten people came to the hotel and told me that they had seen my parents the night before they were deported. Which was an obvious lie, because they wouldn’t have dared to. They told me all kinds of stories; they brought my parents potatoes and all kinds of things and then the pay-off, of course, was that I could give them some money or some food or, that’s all they wanted. As I said, at least ten people who came. And, “I was always your best friend,” “I was always your father’s best friend,” and...
Q:These were all the people who wouldn’t talk to you when you lived there before?
A:Exactly. One interesting thing is I found out, of my class of 32, and I am in that age group, they are all people who had to go into the army, 18, 19 years old. Of my class of 32, five are left today. Including myself. The others all died, either on the Russian front or on the western front.
Q:You said your wife was able to join you a little while after you went back to Germany. Did you work together at all?
A:We worked together, um hum. For the first two or three months, she was at a different location, but then she was transferred and we were stationed in one place. Had a very nice apartment. I must say it was a very good time; we were the conquering heroes at the time. And I wouldn’t call it revenge, but it made you feel good when you saw the Germans crawl and you were the conqueror. Maybe it is not the right attitude to have, but you can’t help but feel good.
Q:I can understand it. So you arrived back in Germany November ‘45 and how long did you stay?
A:Two-and-one-half years. Just about two-and-one-half years.
Q:And then where did you go?
A:Then we went back to England because we felt it was time to make a living because we made an excellent living in Germany with the Occupation Army. We were extremely well paid. Everything was done for us; we had a maid; we had our shoes shined every day. The laundry was taken care of. The cooking was done for us. We lived like kings. And we figured, well, let’s not look for another job; we could have found another job with the Occupation Army, but we figured it was time to either start a family or at least start to make a living and go to the States, as we had planned all the time. So we first had to go back to England and applied for a visa to go to America, which came within a couple of months. At that time it was very easy because the German quota was not filled. And in June 1948, we left for New York.
Q:Did you have any family here when you came?
A:Yes, I have several uncles and aunts and quite a few cousins.
Q:So you went to New York first and how soon.
A:No, we went immediately to Philadelphia; my uncle and aunt lived in Philadelphia.
Q:So you came here right away.
A:We rented an apartment; our first apartment was in Logan. We lived there for about a year.
Q:And then you started your new life here.
A:And we started our new life here, and it wasn’t easy to find a job at that time. It was ‘48. The boys came back from the army and...
Q:Everyone was looking for a job. Is that when you went back to school to Temple?
A:Shortly thereafter. First I had to make a living somewhere.
Q:What did you do when you first went to work here in Philadelphia?
A:The very first job was in a gas station. At 59th and Lancaster. And that was another one of those jobs that used you, paid you the absolute minimum. I made $5.00 a day working from 7:00 in the morning until 10:00 at night. No overtime. I didn’t last too long. And then I got another job in a lampshade factory on Arch Street, and that man greeted me by saying: “Are you a German Jew?” I said, “Yes, I am.” He was a Russian Jew. He said, “I don’t like the German Jews; they don’t want to work.” And I told him, “Listen, I came to the United States to start a new life, to start a family and I want to work and give me a chance, will you,” and he did. But he again used me. He promised me a raise within a couple of weeks I guess, and then he didn’t come through with it and it came because it was a union job and he can’t pay me more. He also paid me $5.00 a day. And then little by little, I did a job which I hated. I guess it was about the only thing that I could do at the time; I was a Fuller Brush Man. I hated every minute of it.
Q:When did you actually become a chemist?
A:Then I got a job as a photographer in a microfilming outfit. It was a commercial outfit that did nothing but microfilm documents. At that time there was a war scare again and people microfilmed all papers, documents, what have you. Then I started going to night school, because I didn’t want to keep that job forever. I took up chemistry at Temple University and started to look for a job. Which again wasn’t easy, but there were ads in the paper for Rohm Haas in 1956 and I applied, and they hired me, much to my own surprise. They hired me with more pay than I had gotten at the microfilming outfit. I started in February 1956 and I’ll be celebrating my 28th anniversary in a few months.
Q:That’s wonderful. You must be doing a good job for them. I would like to go back just for a few minutes and ask you about your wife since you met her, and she shared some of the same experiences that you did. Can you tell us, you met your wife in England and she also was originally from Germany. Can you tell us how she got to England?
A:She was younger and she was able to join a Children’s Transport. I think there was no quota as far as England was concerned and they took any number of children, or at least 1500 at a time. And she was one of them to go to England on the Children’s Transport, lived with a Jewish family in London and was also interned because she lived in the coastal area. She was interned for nine months. We didn’t know each other at that time. And she was also sent to Manchester to the same hostel and I came to in December ‘41. That’s where we met and Manchester is where we got married in January ‘44.
Q:So that was a good place for you both.
A:She worked also on defense work making uniforms, army uniforms. And she was very lucky; one interesting point was, she was guarding the factory she was working at at night, a so-called fire watch, in case a bomb dropped. They had rats at that time in the factory and a rat climbed up into her slacks; she was wearing slacks at the time, and they ran out of that factory in a great hurry because they were just scared. They weren’t allowed to run out but they did and about five minutes after they had run out, the factory was hit by a bomb. So a rat saved her life.
Q:Her life, oh.
A:That is fate.
Q:That is fate, yes it is. Thank you so much for sharing your experiences with us.
A:You are welcome.
USHMM Archives, RG-50.462*0017 page \* arabic21 From the collection of the Gratz College Holocaust Oral History Archive.
