United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Ruth Zellner
October 13, 1999
RG-50.030*0402 PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a taped interview with Ruth Zellner, conducted on October 13, 1999 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
RUTH ZELLNER
October 13, 1999
Beginning Tape One
Question: Can we begin by having you tell us your full name at birth?
Answer: Okay. I like to talk. Like -- we -- we lived in Germany, very, very nicely in Breslau.
Q: Can I get you to say your full name?
A: Oh.
Q: Your name.
A: My name is Ruth Zellner. I was born in Germany, Breslau, which now is Polish, called Wroclaw. Poland always moved around after each war. That’s why my father, who was born in Germany, in Posen, also his hometown became Polish and we ended up on the Polish quota for the United State, which made all the difference in the world.
Q: Can you tell us when you were born?
A: If I have to. I was born in 1920, which makes me now almost 79, I have a birthday pretty soon. So I’m not so young any more. But I’m one of the few who was old enough to know what was going on, and then still around. The little kids, the American newcomers, but they don’t remember. The old people are gone.
Q: Can you tell us the exact date of your birth? The exact date of your birth?
A: We moved in --
Q: Of your birth. The -- the day you were born.
A: Oh, the birth.
Q: Yes.
A: December first, 1920.
Q: Okay.
A: My parents had married after the war. My father had been a front soldier. And of course when Hitler came, he said that some soldiers, Jewish men who had fought for the Fatherland, they would be not hurt in any way, which of course was a lie. My father was a very prominent lawyer, made a lot of money, we lived very nicely and comfortable. He was also, as a lawyer, not prepared to move to a different country with different law. A doctor can move anywhere, learn the language and check the people. My father, by the time we got here was 60, and he -- he did -- his English was pretty grim. So there he -- we all had to start over. Now, before we get here, let me tell you where it began.
Q: Could we begin also by having you say the -- the name of your mother and the name of your father.
A: Okay.
Q: The full name --
A: Yeah.
Q -- and your mother’s maiden name, if you know it.
A: Yes. My father was Mac Zellner. My mother’s name was Gertrude Markus, M-a-r-k-u-s. She was one of the first women who got a doctor’s degree, at a time when most of them didn’t even have high school, she started at the University of Breslau, and had a PhD. She never used it, too bad, but she -- she was a very intelligent woman, and that helped. My father studied law in Germany, and he was just a young lawyer when he was drafted into the army. After he came back, he met my mother and they were married very shortly after. You know, after the war, there’s always -- the men come home, the same thing after this war, they want to settle down. We were two children, I am Ruth, my sister who was younger, was Margaret. And we lived in a plain place in the beginning, because you couldn’t get anything. Then we had a very beautiful home. And we were beginning to look to come to the United State. We did get a visa from my father’s cousin, whose parents had come to the States already, we didn’t know her. But, as I said, the Polish quota was oversubscribed by that time in ’37 or so when we started looking. You just couldn’t get on it any more. So we looked around to see if there was any place that we could wait, like for instance, Cuba.
Q: I-I want to spend a little more time on your childhood. Do you know anything about your grandparents from either side? Do you remember them, do you know their names?
A: My father’s parents had died long before me. I somewhere have a little family tree, but it’s not very helpful. They must have been born early in the previous century. My mother’s parents I knew, but they too -- my grandfather died very early of a gallbladder operation. My grandmother, we had to leave her behind, because she was old and a little weak. We couldn’t have left with her. So wi -- my parents took her into a Jewish home in Breslau, paid forever, and one thing I really like to mention that, we had a lovely cook with us forever, she was a very devoted Catholic lady. And when my grandmother went to that home, she rearranged for her to have a job there, so my grandmother had somebody who was familiar. What we were told is that she died in the home. I hope it’s true. I come back to that life -- cook of ours later. As a -- my childhood was all right. When things became difficult, I left the school where I was, because these were the daughters of the big shots of Nazis, and my parents sent me to a school run by the church. The teachers were not nuns or anything, but they were [indecipherable] with everybody was from the church. There were quite a few Jewish kids there. In the beginning when we came, the teacher would come in [indecipherable] crystals, I don’t know if you understand that. When Hitler came, heil Hitler. So that wasn’t so great after awhile, but they were very dedicated to helping the Jewish kids. But in ’37, things became too uncomfortable, and I went to the Jewish school. I still measure [indecipherable] I don’t know what -- if you know what that is, it’s a little more than the metric. Some of my children from my school got two years credit in college here for what -- our exam. Yeah. Many of those who got a lot of credit were veterans. So they, of course, they were very helpful. When I sent my paper to Washington, or Albany I think it was, they didn’t get too hysterical about it. I didn’t get credit, but I never studied for credit. I only took the courses I needed for my work. [indecipherable] jumped ahead. Then, in ’39, we were told that the -- no, I think I want to tell you about the 10th of November, that was the Kristallnacht.
Q: But before we get there, I’d like to spend a little bit more time on your childhood, and your schooling. You just mentioned that when you were younger, you went to -- you implied that you went to a mixed school of Germans that were non-Jews, and Jews. Could you tell us more about that? How did the children get along?
A: Before Hitler, fine, they didn’t know the difference, you had friends all over. Once Hitler came, those who were your friends, were your friends, but they wouldn’t invite you any more, you wouldn’t invite them. It was difficult, it got stranger. The last year that I was in the Catholic school, I was the only Jewish girl in my class. Lunchtime, nobody talked to me. I was -- it wasn’t that they didn't like me, but they were afraid. Their fathers had positions in the Nazi party, and she has a Jewish girlfriend? They couldn’t take the chance. But by that time, I was 17, and I really didn’t like it there any more. As a matter of fact, there was a school in Berlin where the children of the em-embassies, American, English, would go and learn English, and speak -- get their own education, the British education. And I wanted to go there. I thought that would be the right thing to do. My parents didn’t want me to do that because they thought if there’s a quick emigration, I’d be in Berlin, they’d be in Breslau. They said, if you don’t want to be in the -- in the Catholic school, go to the Jewish school. I was very happy there, I was one -- one among equals. I was relaxed, we had a lot of fun, until th-the Kristallnacht.
Q: H-How did you -- how did you understand what was beginning to happen? Did your parents speak to you about it? Did you speak with your parents when you got home, for instance from the school?
A: I had the papers. They said this paper is not in the national interest, it will be suspended for two weeks. Well the two weeks are 60 years now. So I mean, I saw what’s going on. Also, you had all these Hitler talks on the radio, and were -- this was a very noisy way of controlling people, they were marching along. But it did not really affect me so much. And when I was in the Jewish school, we had our own swimming pool. So what did I care? And that -- there was a -- a th-theater group, Jewish, concert Jewish. So the last year, when Hitler really was getting going, it was a cocoon, a ghetto. Which I didn’t even mind, I was too young, I was happy. There were nice boys, there were nice girls. So what’s wrong with that? And as I said, y -- that came to the Kristallnacht. Until that time, life was okay, I knew I would be leaving Germany, and everybody wanted to. But there was no hardship yet, thank God, that came after we left.
Q: C-Can you talk a little bit about homelife, even before Kristallnacht, really, the early 30’s, the mid-1930’s. Wh-What was it like to be in your house? What was your mother like? How -- how did your family spend time together?
A: It’s -- to tell you the truth, I took it so for granted, that I can hardly tell you. I went to school in the morning, I came home. It was a big nice apartment, and I -- in -- I remember once I left Germany, I had a shock. When you took your dirty boots off, they didn’t come back clean by themselves. The cook did it, so -- I took that for granted. Th-There were so many things that I later thought, gee whiz [indecipherable] spoiled. I was not spoiled, because we were told to clean our room, to do this and that. But still and all, I remember one of the girls, one Jewish said to me, “This is a nice pin, is it real?” “I wouldn’t wear costume jewelry.” And you know, these things stay with you. And one of the girls -- and also, as I said, before Hitler, invited me to her home. And I said, “Mom, you say these people are poor, they have five rooms, we only have six.” So my mother said, “How big were the five rooms? As big as our living room?” I learned. You know, it -- that’s why when you asked me, it seemed so terrible away from it. I lived in the moon. And of course, anything I wanted I had. When te -- again my parents trained me. I know I wanted to have a writing thing like this, you know, with envelopes and everything. I bought it. But it was 15 marks maybe. My father said, “No. Poor children have to live on that for a week. You return it, and you get your money back.” So I knew you can’t just buy anything you wanted. But what you needed, you got plenty. So if you must -- if you remember my life before Hitler, if somebody who lived not on Park or Fifth Avenue, but on the Upper East Side, going to the schools that you knew and knowing the people you were supposed to know. But when you are 12 - 13, you are not [indecipherable] very often, nowadays they are more than then.
Q: Can you tell us some about your father? A-A-A-Again, during this pre-Hitler time, before a lot of anxiety had come about for the Jewish community?
A: Well, my father was very well known. He wrote a column for the newspaper about anything new in laws. When the laws was the -- not Hitler law, he had a reserved column, whenever he wanted to write. He had the clients from here to there, very important cases. He was a very charming man, and a very good speaker. So he would tell socially anecdote about all the doctors and lawyers in Breslau. He was very well known at the -- by the judges. His word counted. I don’t know if I should tell you one case that’s really -- by that time Hitler was [indecipherable] already. There was a couple, an Austrian woman and a German man, and the laws were that -- I have to get this -- they wanted to get married. And the laws are, you have to go by the marriage laws of your home country. The woman was Austrian and Catholic, and couldn’t divorce and marry that man. So they had many cases, I mean, they tried it, no. Then my father got the case, and my father, as a Jew said, I think I have an angle. It is important to the German country to have strong German children. If you keep that woman from marrying the man, having children, then it is against the national interest and the Austrian law should not apply. My father won the case. The judge said, “As a Jew, you really made a case.” My father said, “I’m a lawyer.” The joke was, she was over 45. No children. It’s just one of the stories that I remember. But I mean, he had an angle. He knew what -- and it -- he wasn’t sarcastic, he had a client and he worked for it. He also said -- and that is very different from lawyers here, for every marriage, divorce, he reunited half the people. He said it is not right to take money if you can protect a life. Another thing I remember from my father as a young lawyer, he worked -- he was associated with a much older man. They went for a com -- how shall I say? It was -- it [indecipherable] of a contract they were working on. They spent five hours on that. Eventually they hashed it out. My father and his mentor went back to the office. The older man opened the drawer, took out the contract which was almost exactly what they came to. He had written that before. And he said to my father, when you argue with people, or have a contract with them, you’ve got to remember their point of view. You don’t say it in the beginning, but you have to know how far you can come to make them meet. I wish they had it now in a few places. So, I mean, my father had a very solid background, but my mother said she used to go to court when he was pleading, sit in the back and monitor it. She would tell him what the reaction was of the people, also whether his voice carried. I was too young. I would have loved to go because I was always fascinated by the law, and as a kid I was reading all his law books. Some of them weren’t so kosher. I mean, some of them had things there that [indecipherable]. So I learned a lot. I used to tell the other kids what was going on, you know, things that nowadays you read it in every book, but in those days -- my parents didn’t mind. They always felt that what I can learn, okay. As a matter of fact, I had a reputation. My mother used to say -- and then 40 years later the people in my office said it, you cannot keep secrets from Ruth. My mother said to my father, “If -- she will always find out and tell everybody. But if you tell her it’s a secret, she not say peep.” And that was from when I was 12 til I was 80. Well, it was funny.
Q: Can you speak some about the role of faith in your family? The role of religion in your family?
A: The what?
Q: The role of religion.
A: Oh, religion, all right.
Q: H-How -- how -- h-how did it play a part in your family?
A: I see, yeah. Well, I tell you, my father had been -- I mean, everybody came from a religious family, that really -- they were. My father, as a student had been at the fraternity that was not Jewish. Most of the Jewish professionals, lawyers, had belonged to -- I forgot the name, what -- casaya, I think. My father was not. I don’t know if you know then, students fought with [indecipherable] and he had a star. As a matter of fact, when my father died here, he had collapsed and was in the hospital, and a very nice doctor took care of him, but he was very aloof. They thought he was a German Nazi. As it turned out, when we -- when my father died, they asked if we would allow an autopsy, and my sister said, “Yes, but the funeral mustn’t be delayed because we are Jewish.” That man fell over. He said, my God. I mean, he had been professional, but he’d rather not. But I [indecipherable] get into details about it. But this was -- my father didn’t look Jewish, he had a very -- I wouldn’t say arrogant, but dominating. When he came in, you knew it. And one time that I was still in Breslau, a woman came up to me and said, “Are you Ruth Zellner?” And I said yes. She said, “I recognized you by your father’s walk, and by your mother’s red hair.” This was red. So you know it -- people knew us. My mother came from a much more Orthodox background. My great-grandfather, her grandfather was a cantor and very -- very well known too. So when they married, of course as a student, my mother was free will -- I mean, a respectable lady, but it was unusual to be a student. But she said she wanted a Jewish home, so we had a kosher home. Passover dishes and all this. And I hated Passover because my grand -- great-grandfather, the cantor, made it last forever. And I couldn’t understand. He [indecipherable] the maid took me home early, but not early enough for me. Then my father come back the Seder after my great -- great-grandfather died, then he made it very interesting. And he -- sometimes in -- you know, during the end of the -- rather the beginning of the Hitler time, many people realized that there were Jews who hadn’t much of an idea. So we would invite these people to let them join in a Seder, they’d never seen such a thing. And my father always -- he doesn’t just [indecipherable] down this thing, he would stop and make very interesting comparison, so it was a very nice Seder. He died right after the Seder on Passover many years later. So Seder has -- now I don’t like it so much any more. So the -- otherwise, my parents were members of the Jewish community. There were Jewish clubs, even before Hitler. The B’nai Brith, and the Society of [indecipherable] and of course on the high holiday, people went to synagogue or dressed up with their prayer books, until Hitler came. Then you didn’t dress up, you didn’t have -- show your prayer book, you just sort of sneaked in into a little something. There were several synagogues in Breslau, Orthodox, I don’t think you would call of a member of the Reform -- not even Conservative, it was a Modern. Very nice rabbis and a beautiful building, burned down.
Q: Do you remember the name?
A: Of the synagogue?
Q: Yes.
A: New synagogue. And the old one, I don’t know why, it was called the [indecipherable]. It’s -- that’s animal. I don’t know, maybe it was the shape of it. They could not burn that down because too many Nazis lived around the houses there. But ours -- I may even have a picture. Gee, I didn’t think of it. Maybe when we have a lunch break. What a beautiful building. And weddings, I remember the older sister of a friend of mine, who had a wedding that was still before Hitler became to -- too much of a nuisance, with the long, white velvet gown, marching down for a mile, like Saint Patrick’s. This -- but of course, that stopped too. Otherwise -- I mean, we were part of the Jewish community, and there was a Jewish community paper, and I remember they had a lot of family announcement of course, you know how it is, it is like patting on your shoulder, the big shot this and the big shot that. And they also lived that, the little boys who became Bar Mitzvah. And when I saw the big brother of my girlfriend was listed, I was so grown up. Then, after awhile, the older sisters of my friends got engaged, more grown up. I must have 10 years [indecipherable]. And these papers were very nice. I don’t know if you’ve heard of the Aufbrau. That was formed here in the early 30. And here too, they had announcement of things that happened in the Jewish immigrant community, and people -- also after the war -- I want to go ahead on that now, when people came over from the camps, they would have long lists of newcomers, where relatives could meet again. Well, now they have a few obits. And that’s just the way it goes, it’s also 60 years. But I remember the Jewish -- Breslau Gemeindeplatt. It meant, the community, the Jewish community of Breslau. That was pretty cohesive. I’m not sure how many people were there, but it was a lot. They are gone.
Q: Do you know anything about where your father fit politically in the Jewish community? Was he a member of groups, was he ever called on to -- to mediate things? Was your father --
A: No, my father was involved in Jewish thing, as I said, the B’nai Brith, and the other organization. Otherwise, before Hitler it didn’t matter whether people were Jewish or not. That -- you see, in many ways the German Jews, of the educated, professional class were so integrated, much more even than here. You just didn’t know. And you didn’t ask, I mean, Dr. Zellner, who -- what are you, Catholic, Jew? Nobody cared. But that came down with a bang.
Q: What language did you speak at home? What language was spoken at home?
A: In Germany?
Q: Yes. In Breslau.
A: Yeah, German.
Q: German.
A: No, I don’t even understand Yiddish.
Q: Okay.
A: I can dope it out when I see it, because you know, German people thought Yiddish was vulgar. It was bad German. It isn’t, it’s a language in its own and they bring it up again. But the only language we spoke was German. And it what they call high German. I -- I personally was very good. I remember when I wrote essays in school. One day we had to write one -- that was the -- not Nazi school, it’s one of the earlier ones, I was maybe 13. The teacher gave us [indecipherable] of paper and said, I want to read to you a story, how that subject should have been addressed. So how interesting, she read my story. I was so surprised. And when I had -- you may not know when -- you have [indecipherable] too, as you have a choice subject. You are being examined in three or four things, and one you can choose because you think you are most interested in. So I had chosen German literature. And by that time the Jewish school was not allowed to conduct its own exams any more. We had to have one of the Nazi big shots supervise the whole thing. He was great. He was wonderful. You know, that was always -- they were such nice people, but they -- most of the time they’re afraid to come out. Now this one examined me, and everybody was laughing because I really felt so at home with [indecipherable] and Schiller and all that stuff. I don’t know how much you know about them. So I’m saying that to show how integrated we were. And the -- some of the Nazi -- none of the Nazi teachers I had in the Catholic school were evil, because the religion balanced that. They were high in the party because they had to be, but when they could help you, they did. But God forbid it would come out. That would have hurt them, and also their families. So that was one of the reason that people went along. They did try to have -- when I get to the -- the 10th of November, I’ll tell you some of that. Do you have enough of my first chapter?
Q: Pretty much. I do have a few more questions I would --
A: I talked more about it than I had planned, but if you have any other questions on my old past.
Q: Well you’ve s -- you’ve talked about being very integrated, the -- the -- the Jews and the non-Jews. What did your parents teach you about being German? Did they talk to you about that -- that you are a German citizen, that you’re a patriot? Wa -- this is when you’re younger.
A: I don’t think my parents made speeches, they lived it. We knew the Jewishness by being kosher. We knew the non-Jewishness by having books, all the German literatures, and we were supposed to read it. I mean, they didn’t sit down and say this is that and this is this. A few weeks ago, I saw an obit in the Times that a man [indecipherable] died. He was the son of a very important Weimar official. I don’t think he was the president, but he was a chancellor or so. [indecipherable] all the Jews voted for him. There was some [indecipherable] who was a Jew, and had -- I don’t remember which position. So they were in the highest government position between ‘24 and ‘33. I don’t know if you know about the inflation. After the war, the German money wasn’t worth anything, if you had a suitcase full of money. My father said he would get paid with shoes for me, because when people got paid, they went to the bank, it wasn’t worth anything, million, billion. Then von Schacht, who was later on a Nazi, straightened things out and in ’24 it stabilized, and between ’24 and ’32, there were many important Jews in the government, in art, in the Berlin, the plays, the music, many names that came over here eventually. It was a very blooming, blooming positive thing, and we were part of it. My mother and father went to the theater, they told us what the big plays were. So we were never -- we never sat down and got told the facts of life, I don’t mean that this way, but we just lived it. I don’t know how that is here with the rich people, but we were very close. My parents were not -- I mean, they had the big social life, but we were part of that [indecipherable] their children. So they knew who we were dealing with.
