Oral History-tape #1 Last update: 8/5/02 Ruth, Steven, Flora, Leo Father was Solomon Winter, born August 29, 1871 in Wittelshofen Mother was Hedwig Winter, born 2/6/1874. In Bütthard by Würzburg
SF: Spell Wittelshofen
FF: I hate to do that.
SF: Where is it located?
FF: In Bavaria Mother’s maiden name was Sichel.
I know my grandparents names but not when they were born. Mother’s mother’s name was Malie (or Mallie?) Sichel. Mother’s father’s name was Simon Sichel My father’s mother’s name was Hanna Winter, maiden name Monheimer.
Grandfathers’s name was Falk Winter.
Grandmother was about 80 about ‘22. Died in 1922. and never knew my grandfather.
Never knew mother’s parents too. Never knew either grandfather.
My parents married in 1899. They were matched. Introduced and the man who introduced mother to father said that father comes from wealthy parents. Only trouble in family is red hair. If she doesn’t mind red hair, he is the only child so she will do very well. So my mother said it doesn’t bother me, I have to see the man. When she was introduced she really fell in love with him and I don’t blame her, I would have too.
Set up by a matchmaker. When my mother’s parents died, she moved to her sister who was married and her sister’s husband was a teacher and a cantor. The cantor and teacher in our home town was a friend of his and that how he ur... not really a matchmaker but a friendly matchmaker. Actually through a mutual friend.
SF: Like how Ginny and I met on a blind date.
SF: Describe your parents.
FF: My grandmother was extremely smart but I didn’t like her too much. Very bossy.
SF: Comes naturally
FF: Why do you have to look at each other like that. In fact when the minister in our town wanted a special sermon written up he came to my grandmother and she could write like a writer. She was very bright. And my parents were very good people, very honest people, very charitable people. They helped everybody. Everybody. No matter what religion or whatever. Color they didn’t have at that time. In fact one beggar came to town and my parents were away. They were away. They were invited somewhere. When he got off the bus someone said to him ‘Fraü Winter isn’t home today’ so he said ‘I might as well go’ because if my mother wasn’t home he wouldn’t come. And the Jewish schnorrers they used to call, came every few weeks. He ate by us, he slept by us. And for a while he didn’t come and my parents knew where he came from so they called up the Jewish community there and he(had) died. And he left my mother all his earthly goods, which were 100 marks, and my mother went and took the 100 marks and got him a tombstone. That’s how good my parents were.
We had every year from the, what do you call that, orphanage in Furth where Ida was. We had 4 boys all summer and we dressed them with shoes and everything and we sent them back again.
For years. I was in love with one and I wrote it on a post card. The president of the school called my father and he told me never to write things like that on a postcard. What did I know. That was really great. It was a good, good home.
My mother was very good looking and my father was, to me, very good looking too. My father was very tall. This is my daddy. That’s the hometown.
Ruth: And he had a red beard, right.
SF: And a mustache. Did he have a beard or just a mustache?
FF: Had a mustache. And your (Ruth’s) mother was the only one who resembled my father in size, in tall he was about like Uncle Leo. Not quite that tall but tall. Not stocky. He was well proportioned but not fat.
My mother used to be very beautiful but in the later years she got stout. She got stout. You know they ate a lot of .... I don’t know. She was stout.
SF: What peculiarities do you think of when you think of your parents?
FF: I never think of any peculiarities (habits).
SF: They were good people, generous people, and your father always looked the other way with whatever you did.
FF: You bet. And my mother didn’t approve of it. I never could find anything wrong with my parents. I was very young when I left and whenever I came home I really had a good, good time. I was lazy and didn’t want to do any work. And my mother always said “child, one time in life must everyone work and someday it is going to hit you and you better start at home.” Of boy, did I learn. Huh?
SF: What did your father do? FF: He was a cattle dealer.
SF: What did your mother do during the day?
FF: Huh. She had a house. We had two maids. We had a man who worked for us and two maids. And we had, what’s you call it, where the cows go in. We had a big barn. The green grass. The pasture. And we had further away those pastures. They had to be gone after. Then we had a very big garden with all kinds of fruit: apples, pears, plums, nuts, and the gardens they were...and we had beautiful gardens with every vegetable under the sun. We never bought vegetables. We never bought salad. We never bought fruit. We grew all the stuff like that. Cherries, everything. We even grew flowers. Anything there was we never bought.
SF: What did you do in the wintertime?
FF: We kept them. They were sterilized in jars and they were in those big jars. And there was a thermostat in the middle of them. Boiled them in a big vat. We had them in the hundreds. The food had to be taken care of, in the cellars. We had big cellars. I told you our house was built on the cellars of a castle. And in the cellars we had those big...they were like closets and you pulled out the drawers and they were full of apples and then on the ground we had earth and in the earth we buried red beets and all those kinds of things. They last(ed) from one winter until the spring. Beets were kept in the bushels and kept in the sand. Big sacks were on pieces of paper. And the apples. Auch, did we have apples. We had a cellar twice the size of this room and the wooden things in which the apples were, were all around. When the name was written on, what kind of apples they were. And the other thing was for the wine.
SF: Did you make your own wine? FF: No we bought it. And beer for the summer. We had a big barrel of beer. It was a good life. You would have enjoyed it. Oh God, how you would have enjoyed it as a child, to come to a place like this. You didn’t appreciate it because that’s all you knew. It was hard work. But that’s all they had to do, really. I mean there wasn’t... no woman had to ever work.
SF: What kind of transportation did they have?
FF: My father had a horse and ...you know like they have in the Pennsylvania Dutch...they have those buggies. Heavier buggies. In the winter he had a sled because you couldn’t use the wagon.
SF: You didn’t have a car?
FF: No. Motorcycle.
SF: You had a motorcycle?
FF: Bianca’s father had a motorcycle. SF: Was it a BMW. FF: No. It was a triumph. I had two bicycles.
My older sister was Marta and my other sister’s name was Gerda. My older sister was born August 1st, 1900 in Wittelshofen and Gerda was born May 17, 1903. Marta married Samuel Bravman. He was born February 10, 1893 and Gerda married Emmanuel Danzig who was born on July 29, 1895. Marta and Samuel met in Wittelshofen. He lived there; he came back after the first World War and that’s how they met. I was 6 years old and don’t know any of the details. Gerda met Emmanuel through a friend of mine. I told that friend that I have a sister who is older than me who I would love to come to München. He invited her and they fell in love, they really fell in love. But he always loved me. He always told me he loved me. In a different way.
Samuel was a cattle dealer together with my father and Ruth’s father was first a procorist (sp? and word?) . He worked for Truler (name?) procorist. Like an accountant. In the accounting line. He had education for it. And later they moved away. The firm was sold to a firm in England and they moved to England (the firm) and then her father worked for the temple. First he held mincah service and then he did everything. He was the shamus and the banus and the...he did everything there was to do in the temple. He held the afternoon services and all that.
And then one boy, Sigbert, my favorite, was born to Marta and Samuel. He was born September 19, 1923. He was just a pride and joy to everybody. That’s Bianca’s brother. He was really something.
Sigbert became a baker. He was so smart but you couldn’t send him to school (because of the times). He would have outdone anybody. So Ida worked in Karlsruhe in her uncle’s bakery and they brought him there as a baker. She said he was one of the best. He was really the pride and joy to everyone.
Ruth: Where does Ida fit in?
FF: Ida’s uncle married my sister. Ida was a friend who lived in the same town. Ida’s mother was a widow. Her maiden name was Bravman. And my sister married the Bravman. So Ida is not related to me at all, but she called my sister Aunt Marta and her husband Uncle Samuel and I wanted her to call me Aunt Flora and she wouldn’t do it. We went to school together.
First, the Turner and Weiler. Their father’s name was Sichel and he was a brother of my mother. My father had no brothers or sisters. He was an only child. My mother had 12 brothers and sisters. There were 12 children altogether. One cousin is Aunt Saler. Her mother was a Sichel. And there was another sister and she had two sons and a daughter and the two sons were in the first World War. One was killed in action and one was at the day of the (World War I) armistice he threw a letter in the mailbox to tell his parents when he is coming home and the mailbox exploded and killed him. So my uncle and aunt just died of broken hearts, of TB. And their daughter was very badly spoiled and through the Hitler time I don’t know what happened to them.
Uncle Emmanuel was also in Portland. He died, his wife died and his sons died. There were three uncles in Portland. Sons were sent to America. And the other sisters they all died. Some of them I never knew. Don’t know what my mother’s parents did for a living.
Ruth Turner is my first cousin and was born in Portland.
Herta is from my father’s side. Aunt Herta’s mother and my father were first cousins. Herta’s mother’s maiden name was Winter and my father’s name was Winter. My father’s father and Herta’s mother’s father were brothers. And Gretl’s father was another brother of my grandfather. I don’t know how many brothers there were and there were two sisters also. I was not too interested in some of the relatives. When you are young, what do you care about such things?
We’re aren’t related at all to the Kalbermans. No relation whatsoever. My father’s mother. No. Daddy’s mother’s...Uncle Max Frank. My (Actually Siegfried’s) father’s mother and Uncle Max were brother and sister and Uncle Max married Tanta’s (Mella Kalberman’s mother) sister, which is the Vineland family. Lehman. That’s pretty far.
There are some pictures of daddy. You know, you wrote on them. That’s our daddy. The oldest was daddy. That’s our daddy with his bicycle he was so proud of. That was with his dog.
Cannot tell you about your father’s brothers and sisters. Your father had one sister, Hedwig, who was married. Had no children. Father’s birthday October 16. Mother’s was born in 1873. Could be. And father was born in 1874. He was a year younger. Hermann Frank and Therese Frank. Her maiden name was Frank. They lived in Buttenwiesen. In Bavaria. The sister’s name was Hedwig. She was born 1902 and the other brother’s name was Karl and he was born 1904, Ernst was born 1907, and Ludwig 1912.
In Buttenwiesen Siegfried was also a butcher and cattle dealer. He came to the United States in 1939. A cattle dealer was this. They bought cattles and all depends. If they had cattles for ... if they bought them for slaughter then they fat(ten) them up and then brought them to the cattle market auction. If they had cattles which the people needed for milk or for er... and they sold them from one to another. We bred cattles too. They went to the auctions and bought what they needed. If they had orders for cattles for pulling the wagons then they went to the auctions and tried to get them.
SF: People put orders in to them for what kind of cattles they needed?
FF: That’s right. And then they bought them and then sold them for profit. Sometimes we bred some cattles. There was a big, big cattle market that was a few days away. He had to go a few days and then bring them home and then fatten them up and then bring them to the slaughterhouses. That’s how they made the money.
SF: Any of father’s relatives?
FF: The cousins Otto Frank and Walter Frank. Their fathers were brothers. They’re very old. Also the sister-in-law also is very old. They live in New York. They came to America the year you were born. I went with her...she knew how to sew and wanted to make a living at it. I went with her to those trade places. I was already that big but I took her under my arm and I went with her. We walked all over where the sewing places were. You know, those sweatshops.
Ruth: How did you meet Siegfried Frank?
FF: Oh, boy. Somebody, a very old lady, a friend of my parents who liked me a lot and whenever I from Munich home I stopped in that city which was called Nordlingen to visit that old woman because I really liked her. And they came to America and they always asked me to come and visit them and finally one day I went there. Daddy was very friendly with a couple from Buttenwiesen and they were cousins with those Lefiters and the Leiters. The people I was friendly with (Leiters) and the people he was friendly with. They called me up once and asked me to come at that and that time so I asked why. They said they had a very good friend who would like to meet me, so I asked ‘what does he do?’ So they said he is a butcher so I had no time. I had no time. So then she said ‘when do you have time to come’ and I said ‘I don’t know I’m very busy.’ So one day she called me up and said “Look, you held us up long enough now. This is the best and nicest man you have ever met and you better come. Butcher or shoemaker or whatever it is you better come. You get down from your high horse and you better come.” And so I went. And daddy liked me right away. I had a hat on and he didn’t like my hat. I wore a hat. He said he couldn’t understand how I could wear a hat.... I was 25.
Look at this picture. It was when I was single.
SF: It says care of Eiseman on it.
FF: That’s where I worked.
SF: you worked for the Eisemans?
FF: not for those. For anyone, believe me.
And then he invited me a few times. I was also going with another fella who was...who came from Nürnberg. I was very friendly with him. Daddy wanted to go steady but I told him I had to go to Lake Placid where I worked and I have to find out first what I really want. I liked the other fella better because he was better looking. I got letters. Daddy wrote to me and he wrote to me. That other guy, his name was Weil, wrote a letter to me and the envelope was addressed to me but the inside was addressed to a girl in Germany where he was going steady. He wrote about me and some of things were absolutely untrue. I couldn’t believe it. Now I said to myself ‘you went long enough for the outside of the person, now you better go for the inside.’ Then I kept writing to daddy and he couldn’t understand the letters were so different. They changed so. I told him later.
Then that Beno (sp?) Weil was his name. I figured I cannot write to him, I have to tell him. So then when I came back and daddy picked me up at Grand Central Station and brought me flowers and then he said he was taking me out to eat. Where do I want to go to eat? I said in the delicatessen. He was so relieved. He figured because I worked for such rich people that I have such rich ideas, you know. So we went there and we had a frankfurter and he was so grateful. He said to me ‘I though you have all those high ideas and this...’ and so that was it. Then a week or two later I met that other fella and he came and had something in a box like a thing of beer or whatever it was and he wanted to give it to me and I said ‘you hold it Beno. I don’t want to take a present from you.’ I liked his mother a lot and I told him what I found and we broke up right then and there. I said I brought the letter back, I said ‘you put it in the wrong letter and said you wanted to send it to her so send it to her.’ In the meantime it was very bad and you couldn’t write anymore to Germany so that’s how I met daddy and what happened.
SF: What kind of pets did you have when you were growing up?
FF: Oh, God. Dogs and cats and sheep and a goat, lamb, you name it I had it. Oh I had such beautiful dogs. I did. I had two dogs like this. The little one died and I buried him and put a cross on his grave. My little one Ami and the other one was Leo and the other was Hans (laughter) and they were Saint Bernards. They were so beautiful. They shot them. The Germans shot them when I was home.
I was so afraid to look at a horse I wouldn’t go into the stable. I used to feed the cows. Those kind of things I loved to do but when the horse... We had two horses, one for my father and one.... See in the Jewish religion you could never put a horse and a cow on a wagon to pull because a horse has more strength than a cow. Only two horses or two cows. So when we had in the summer when we had to take home the hay and all those kind of things, we had two horses for this and in the winter we only had one. That horse was so old but I wouldn’t go near it. We had some nice cows. We had little ones. Sometimes 40 and sometimes 5, it all depends. When I was a baby we had one for that purpose, for the milk, and when Bianca and her baby we had two. Always the steady one so the milk didn’t have to be...always the same milk. We had little ones. My father bought once 50 little ones. We had extra stables for a while to see them grow up. You know bigger than calves. They were beautiful. I loved to work with them. I loved to work with them. But nothing in the house. No cooking, no nothing. Boy’s work.
Our house was a nice house. It was nice to those times you know. You had a living room which was a dining room. In the middle of the living room was a dining room table which you could pull out. It was underneath. You pulled it out. We had everything there. We had everything there. We had a credenza, we had a buffet. But every house had in the middle of the living room a table. We had a beautiful stove. A square, long table. The table was a regular size and when we ate we pulled it out just like this and when we had company you pulled more out. Could be pulled out and out. We had beautiful flowers.
Next to the living room was a room which used to be my grandmother’s room. When she died in 1922, I was 10 years old, I remember that. Then my father put his desk in and put his books in and a sewing machine in. We made it just like that. And then we had a kitchen with two big buffets. A milchdich and a fleishdich. And a stove and also a table and all those things. No icebox. Next to the kitchen was what they called a ‘schpice’(sp?) was like a cool room. It was very cold. How it was so cold I don’t know because we had no ice. It came from...it was built up from the cellars, see, and next to it, as big as this, we had what you called it your icebox but there was no ice in there. A pantry. It was very cold in there and I don’t know why.
Then we had the bedrooms. On the same level we had my bedroom and then on the other side we had my sister’s bedroom and upstairs was my parent’s bedroom and another kitchen if you wanted to use the kitchen for two families. You know my mother. It was really built for two families. We used it for storage, for storing things. Then there was another room where we had the flour. When you had so many people you made your own bread and you had the big bins in there. White flour and dark flour. All the things and corn and that kind of stuff in that so-called kitchen.
Then we had a room which was called the ‘gudes tzimmer (good room)”. We had the piano in there, we had the red velvet sofa in there and red velvet chairs and a big table and the most beautiful buffet you have ever seen in your life. I don’t know what ever happened to it. Right now you ask me (what kind of piano) I couldn’t tell you. (Note: it was a Bechstein.) It was like this and had two hands up like this. There were like two handles which were put on there and it was an upright. It was a beautiful piano but I never liked to play it. It was on the second floor. Then we had another room where we had a laundry mangow(?) A mangow where you...after the wash dried you put it through that mangow. We were the only one in the whole... not to dry it, you put it through like your sheets your things you didn’t have to iron (e.g. a wringer). We were the only one to have that, no one else had that. Then we went upstairs and there were the maids’ rooms. On the third floor. Two maids rooms.
Bianca’s parents lived in Munich and Ruth’s parents lived in the same town as we did. (Note: opposite of actual situation.) They had their own house. I remember and I don’t (what their house was like.) My father bought it from an old woman who had no children and nobody. She died and when she died Ida’s mother moved in. Ida’s mother was always renting a place you know. So she moved in and had the downstairs which was a living room, a bedroom, a kitchen and also (a place) like where you kept your fruit and your stuff, you know. My sister lived upstairs. They had beautiful things. When I think of the furniture she got when she got married my heart breaks still today. Beautiful furniture, and they a kitchen and a living room. One room was called a ‘spice tzimmer’ already. An extra room for dining. With a buffet and....it was a beautiful, beautiful room. They had such figurines and everything. We had it home too.
We had a pewter, a whole wall of pewter and we had beer steins, pewter beer steins, other beer steins. Then my father never smoked but he collected some pipes and we had them hanging there and there were ebony pipes with silver things on them and we had beautiful silver. Oh my parents had such beautiful silver, which only came out when company came. And dishes and all that stuff which you buy now...the stuff you bought...the bowls and things ....pottery. We had all that stuff for Passover. We had tons. Up in the roof was in boxes and written on there yontiff fleishdich and milchdich. We had very beautiful furniture in the living room. Very beautiful furniture. We had upstairs that buffet, it was just beautiful. (In the buffet was) good dishes all the porcelains, all good figurines. . The only thing I got from there were those pink little demi-tasse. All those birds, all this here. That’s why it means so much to mean. The birds came from home. I had so much I gave it away. I needed wedding presents for the Hoffheimers so I gave them the crystal bowls and all those kind of things.
SF: What did the farm look like? How many barns did you have?
FF: I tell you something, when I left it was a sad looking thing. It was a very sad looking thing. We had no more cows. We had no more... They took the wagons out. We were the only family.... See for transportation to the nearby cattle market my father had made like a truck which had to be pulled by two horses and he had this made. Everything was taken away. It was very sad. (Before) it looked like a very well kept farm, a very well kept farm.
END OF TAPE 1, SIDE 1.
SIDE 2 We had two barns. Two big barns. We had hay wagons in there. We had a cow wagon for transportation. We had those wheel barrels. Whatever you needed. I don’t even know the name for all those kind of things. One day we had 40 (cattle) and two days later we had 4 or 5. We had one steady cow. Oh boy, we had one steady cow.
SF: Was cattle dealing the family business?
FF: Ya, my father’s father was a cattle dealer and then he also dealed with leather. Leather. Skins. Hides and leather. And he did very well with it. Sometimes my father, when they bothered him, so he says “ok, since he had this friend who had a leather factory so he used to say to him ‘oh, they bother me for so’. He made good money on that too. ’” In the Jewish community he was the president for many, many years. For as long as I can remember. in the gentile community, he was everything but mayor. He was on the school board, he was the other board, he was for the poor, he was everything, everywhere. People used to come to us and brought complaints and he brought it up to the mayor and they had meetings and the school board they had meetings. He was just the only Jewish man in town for all those kinds of things.
SF: So he was the main contact between the gentile and Jewish community?
FF: He was president of the synagogue. When I remembered there were maybe 15 families there and then less and less. The children got married and moved away; the elderly people died and then later on everybody moved away.
SF: What did the family do on a normal week?
FF: The man went out to work and the woman was home and cooked and washed.
SF: Somewhere we got all those doilies.
FF: They did this in the winter in the evening. Oh, yeah. They were sitting there. That was the right way of doing for a well brought up family, just I was the only one who rebelled against it. I blamed my eyes. I used to sit like this and say ‘my eyes can’t see.’
SF: What did the family do for entertainment?
FF: They came to visit each other. The grandchildren came. They went to visit in the afternoons.
SF: Did your father bring flowers home all the time?
FF: No, we had the flowers right outside.
SF: Did they read a lot of books?
FF: Ya, oh ya. Oh my God how I had to go to the library every so often. The school library. We had a lot of books at home.
SF: Did your parents have any special degrees or did your father just learn the trade?
FF: No, my father went to high school when he was young. Novels. Read all books. Genevieve. That was one my mother read every year. My father read books on everything.
Ruth: Who played the piano?
FF: Your (Ruth’s) mother. I played but I didn’t like to. It went too slow for me. They bought me a violin. I started learning and then they told me only boys learn the violin so I broke it. Couldn’t play it.
SF: There was a bearskin rug on the floor?
FF: That wasn’t a bearskin. It wasn’t a bearskin. That was from one of our dogs. I hid the key of the piano. They didn’t know. It was .... What do you call it when the dog dies and then you skinned it and have it fixed. There was one person who picked it up and did everything and they brought it back and it was laying like this but the head was up like that. That wasn’t a dog you can pet. They were dogs for the fields and the cows and for this. Then we had that skin and I had the piano up there. Then when our junior teacher taught me. When my mother came up once he had his arm around me like this. I was 15 or 16 and he was 18. So my mother said from now on, when I get the lessons, she has to be there because she didn’t like that. I said I wouldn’t do it. If you be there, I’m not playing piano anymore. So one day my mother came up and she sat there and did some whatever...crocheting, and I finished and no more. I was very young then. So I took the key and threw it in the dog’s mouth and went down where you couldn’t see. This room was only cleaned for Passover. No one was ever in this room. It was always locked. So then you went and shook out the rug and the things and the key came out. Then I told them what I did. My mother said ‘we’re not going to spend money. If you don’t want to play you don’t play”, so I never played.
Ruth’s mother played. They did everything my parents told them to do. Especially Ruth’s mother. She never said no. They used to say “The oldest can never say no.” The big ones never said that. They did everything they were told
SF: What sports did you participate in?
FF: At home, skiing, bicycle riding, runner in public school and all the school sports–in Munich, not home.
SF: Where did you go skiing.
FF: Home, in Munich, in Garmisch-Partenkirchen, in Lenggries.
SF: How far was Switzerland?
FF: From Munich, 3 and a half, four hours. From Wittelshofen to Munich was 5-6 hours by train.
SF: Did others in the family participate in a lot of sports?
FF: No, just me. They were married already, and when you’re married you don’t do those kinds of things.
SF: Didn’t an uncle skate with Sonya Henie?
FF: Ya, you know that. In Munich everybody went skiing. You didn’t go skiing you were severely an outcast.
SF: How about my father’s family?
FF: Your father’s family had a hard job making ends meet. The only one who really made ends meet was your daddy. His father retired with 42. He had asthma and he had those boys. You know the boys were supposed to support the parents. He was a butcher. But what he did...daddy made money and very hard earned money and he put it all into the house. He built and built and built and daddy was promised a motorcycle and never got it. His youngest brother I knew in Munich. He went to high school there. He went to trade school and as a kaufman (buyer/salesman). I have his picture here. He spent the money the way they made it. He went out with girls like crazy. I never went out with him because I didn’t like the girls he went out with.
Then he had two more brothers. One was a baker. I don’t know what the other one was. I think Ernst was the baker and Ludwig was the salesman. Karl, I don’t know what he was. But the brothers were not that ambitious. He was the most ambitious one. That’s what the people told me from Buttenwiesen. Everyone said he was the best of all. And then he made the money so his sister could get married. She got 10,000 marks when she got married. SF: He made money for her dowry.
FF: Ya. There is another relative in New York. I told you they are elderly people now. That’s the sister’s sister-in-law. She came to Buttenwiesen and she wanted to marry daddy. So they said that if he would marry the sister-in-law he would get the 10,000 marks back but he didn’t like her. She was a very nice person. Recha. You must remember her. She used to come to the house. But he didn’t care for her, he always said. So he had to marry out his sister for 10,000 marks and the studies of his brother cost another 10,000 marks. When it came to him. He did everything on bicycle. To get his motorcycle then something else came up. His father built and built and built and he never got it. That’s why when he got the car here he felt he was king.
He was very active. He was very sporty. Football. All kinds of sports. He had muscles.
Ruth: Like Popeye.
FF: Yeah, he had muscles. Daddy and me, we walked and did exercise and we did everything. He was very sporty. That’s what I liked. After I got to know him, he was really my type of person.
SF: Did you get any awards when you were young?
FF: I got a lot of awards. I was the valedictorian but I got stuck in my speech. I couldn’t finish the speech. My parent’s nearly died. Then I finished it. I was choked up that I had to leave school. So then I....yeah, I was pretty good in school I must say.
SF: The state supported religious schools. Did you go to public or religious school? FF: I went to both a public school and a religious school. We came home from public school and had to go for two hours to Hebrew school. SF: My father did the same thing? FF: I imagine. That’s how we learned. I went there (to public school) until I was 12 years and then I went to high school. They went to public school to 15 or 16 and then they went to another school there which was called Volkpilldenschul (sp?) but I never went there so I don’t know what they learned. After they graduated public school they went every Saturday and Sunday to this same school but for different subjects. I don’t know what they learned because I went away and I never knew....
SF: Did the family take any vacations?
FF: Yeah. My parents sometimes took vacations. My parents went once to Wiesbaden. They had baths there for arthritis and that stuff and then they wanted to go and there was this Jewish family in town and the man was very bad arthritis ridden and then my father sent him.
SF: Did they ever go to another country? FF: No.
SF: Did they go with the family or by themselves? FF: They went by themselves but then they went to Munich but they only went separately to Munich because someone had to be home in the house. You had animals. You had cows, you had dogs, you had cats, you had maids. So my father came and my father came (to Munich) and he wanted to stay a week and then he only stood three days and we wanted to know why. So he said he goes up and down the street and nobody says “good morning, Herr Winter; good afternoon Herr Winter.” He was very lonesome so he left. And my mother wouldn’t go without my father.
SF: Couldn’t the people left behind run the farm.
FF: Yeah, but not the cattle dealers. The cattle dealers had to be there. When a farmer called then they couldn’t do it and they wanted my father.
SF: Didn’t you have to have someone who lived further away for when the fields were snowed in?
FF: No. Our man lived above the stables because when the snow was in someone had to feed the animals. He had the room above the stables and fed them. That happened quite often because sometimes we couldn’t open the shutters for days.
SF: Tell us about the neighbor whose chickens you got drunk.
FF: It wasn’t a neighbor, it was an old woman down and around. She lived in this house. She didn’t like me because when I passed with the bicycle and she lived on the corner house I rang the bell like crazy on the bicycle and that drove her nuts. I knew it drove her nuts so I started a long time before and kept ringing the bell. So whenever something happened... Once her window broke. She called my father. Not by telephone because we were the only Jewish people who had a telephone. Then someone else got it. She told my father I broke her window and when I came home my father said I have to come in. He said “What did you do to Frau Pollock?” I said “I didn’t do anything papa.” He said “She says you broke her window.” I said I wasn’t even there. Ida was her love. You know. So I said “I wasn’t even there papa” so my father said he was going to go out and tell her and he told her. She said I did it anyway. She said all she wanted to do was be paid so my father said ‘Have it fixed. I pay you.” My mother got very mad. She said ‘You shouldn’t do that.” He said ‘She is an old woman. She has no children. What are you going to do, fight with her?” So whenever there was something... When it rained, when it snowed, when the sun shined, it was always me. So once she told the Hebrew teacher that she asked me a brucha, it was thundering and lightening and she said “Do you know the brucha for when it thunders and lights” and I said “I knew it but I forgot.” So she told him and he gave me a good licking because I didn’t tell her the brucha so I really felt hurt. Why is she riding around me all the time. I bring her fruit. I bring her cake and I’m so good to her and she just doesn’t like me. So I figured I’m going to do something that hurts her the most. I’m going to kill her chickens. I went home and I had this blue apron on, I’ll never forget. It had two pockets. I took some schnaps. One thing in our house I must say, nothing was ever locked. Even where we had the money the key was in the thing. Everything had a key. I took a bottle of schnaps and I took some Berches and I put them in. Instead of putting it in a bowl I put it in my pocket. You know they were all soaked through. I put my hands in my pockets and I went down there and I went drup, drup, drup and all the drups came and I just threw this schnaps there. The Berches with the... Whoever taught me this....no one ever taught me this. I made it up myself. They all came and they drank like crazy. I stood there and they all went down and I thought this time she really got it. I though they were killed already and I didn’t care a bit. I went home.
After a while I run again and they were all lying together, all together like a real clique. I didn’t say anything but my mother, I never forget, said to me “How come you’re home all afternoon. How come you’re not...” because I was always running around. I wanted to be home. My father came home and I kissed him and my father came home and was standing on the door. We took off his hat and we wiped his head with a handkerchief and one put the shoes on, the slippers on. All of sudden Frau Pollock comes running. “Herr Winter, Herr Winter, Herr Winter, you gotta come home. My chickens are dead.” So my mother said “What happened” because my father had connections with the veterinarian who treated the animals, you know. So my father said “I come right away” and my father run out and I run after him. He went there and he sees the chickens. It took a long time. They were really drunk. Then he came home and he took me by the hand and he says “this is sad, this is sad.” She had those gray, those real gray and white hens. He says “That’s everything she had. That’s really sad. I wonder what happened.” He’s going to speak to the veterinarian tomorrow.
So at night, after we were finished eating, I never forget, I stood on the door and I said “I know what happened to Frau Pollock’s hens.” So my father said “What happened?” “I made them drunk. I don’t think they’re dead but I think I made them drunk.” So my father said “You didn’t.” My mother said “She wouldn’t say it unless she did.” So they said “What did you do?” so I stood on the door. I had the copper door handle in my hand in case they go after me, if my mother goes after me, I’m right out, you know. So the whole everyone, the maid and everyone, they got hysterical. So the man, our knecht(?) says “You’re right. Because she does nothing but aggravating you and me too.” He says “She doesn’t like us” I said “I don’t think they’re dead because I saw them like this.” So my father got up and says “I can’t believe it. Who told you? Where did you get the schnaps? Where did you get the Berches. How did you cut the Berches?” You know it was heavy to cut it. I cut it. My mother looked and it was really sawed off like this, not the way it was supposed to be. Well they couldn’t get up from the table, they were hysterical.
So my father went out, he says to me “You have to come along and excuse yourself” and I said “no I’m not. I’m not. She hurt me and she lied about me and she told the Hebrew teacher about me and it wasn’t true and I’m not gonna go” and I wouldn’t go. He went out and he says he wants to see what the chickens do and she was there crying with her hands in her apron and my father said “They look alright.” She says they come to. I don’t know what happened, I don’t know what happened. He says “They’ll be alright. They’ll be alright.” And then he didn’t tell her. Later on he told her. He went out on a Saturday after the temple. He went there and he told her what happened and he said to her why it happened. He said “You leave this kid alone. She doesn’t do any harm to you. Everybody likes her and you are the only one who really does all this harm to her and she wanted to get back at you.” He says “you know I don’t help unless its necessary but you leave her alone.” She left me alone.
So when she died we were three girls: Ida, myself and Selma who is in England. We were supposed to sit there in the wake, you know, because we had no funeral home. I didn’t believe she was dead. I said to them “I don’t think she’s dead.” They said “She’s dead.” So I said “I got to try and I took a ball and I bounced the ball back on her, where she was laying there dead, on that wall and when she didn’t move I said “she’s dead.” “Now we have to sit quiet” I said, “Now I know she’s dead.” Because I used to throw the ball against the wall too and it annoyed her to death, you know. I said “She’s dead. We got to leave her alone.” Then we sat real quiet. Left her alone. Ida was crying. She said “you’re going to hit Frau Pollock” and I said “I’m not hitting her but I don’t believe she’s dead.” It was the first time I saw a dead person and it didn’t affect me at all.
SF: Did you do any work on the farm?
FF: A lot. I did everything. I liked it. I mowed the grass. We had a machine where you drove around and this but there were corners where you couldn’t do so you had to have one of those long knives, we called it sense (sp?) and I did it. Once I cut my finger all across. Then we also had a hand one, a sickle, that’s called a sickle here too? And I had to go in the corners. I loved that work. I would have been the best farmer. I did everything on the farm. Fed the cows, milked them. I learned to milk on a goat.
SF: Did you ever deliver any baby animals?
FF: No, I run away. I couldn’t see this. We had geese. We didn’t have geese on our home. We bought the geese and made them fat and then they were schlact(slaughtered).
FF: There was a pond in the gardens. (To Ruth) Do you remember in the gardens where we had all this water coming through? But I tell you, it was very hard. We had a lot of water sometimes and it came all the way up but it couldn’t go up to our house because it was up on the hill, but a lot of people had water. Bianca’s parents had water in their cellar many times. Our house was Schloss 87B. Our house called Schloss Hof. That’s where it was.
SF: Whose castle was it built on?
FF: I forgot. Would you believe it? There were so many those Fursten, those people, those Pfalsgraff. Uncle Leo knows a lot about them. I don’t know anything about them.
SF: Were there any family traditions that you had in particular?
FF: The holidays. Ya. The holidays were always real family tradition. Rosh Hashanah, Yom Kippur, Passover. All the family came to us. The Sabbath. Birthdays we celebrated. Chanukah we celebrated. We were big on birthdays. Not my father. He left the house 5 in the morning. He didn’t want anything..... Came Chanukah I had every Santa Claus chocolate from this size to this size. Came Easter I had every bunny from this size to this size. Passover and Easter never fell together. If it did, then I didn’t have it. But I had every Santa Claus there was. We never made anything out of that.
SF: Your mother put out your clothes for your father?
FF: Yeah. Handkerchief, tie, everything. We tied our father’s shoes. Then there came something new that they didn’t have to be tied. Came like with buckles. He had such beautiful shoes. In the winter they were inside with fur.
SF: Why didn’t he do it?
FF: We were supposed to do it. My father didn’t wear glasses. He wore a zwicker (sp?) . He wore glasses with the thing here. Pinched on the nose. (A pince nez.) Shabbos it was gold and for every day it was silver.
(He normally wore) a suit. A summer suit, black summer suit. Dark blue or black. And a jacket. Never without a jacket. (He always wore a jacket ) and a shirt. My father never worked on the farm. My father couldn’t put a nail in the wall if he wanted to.
SF: What did you normally wear? Dirndls?
FF: Yeah. In winter I wore pants, ski pants and in summer I wore dirndls.
SF: Who were your best friends?
FF: My girlfriend in England and Ida. Selma and Ida and a gentile girl, a very good gentile girl. I understand.... Very good friends.
SF: What about my father’s friends? FF: Yah. He had beautiful gentile girlfriends. He would have married a gentile girl if Hitler wouldn’t have come. It didn’t bother him too much. But he had nice Jewish girlfriends too and many times they wanted to marry him off and he didn’t. He wanted someone sporty and full of the devil and he got it. (Chuckle) That’s what he told me. I never forgot when his mother wrote “what you couldn’t find at home you found far away.” When my mother came to Munich to visit, I used to say “momma, isn’t there anybody from your hometown you want to visit.” She used to say “There are old people, there are very old people who live there.” There were the Hamburgers who lived in our house (in Brooklyn), don’t you remember, on the top floor, and he was always with you when I wheeled you around and I used to feed him and used to give him candies. His sons were as rich as can be. And then she said “There is only one family, and they don’t live to far from here, in Buttenwiesen.”
FF: “What’s their name.” Momma Winter: “Frank”
FF: “Why don’t you ever visit them.” Momma Winter “They have a lot of children.
FF: They weren’t ‘up to our expectations’ so she didn’t visit them. So when I wrote.... Well, first of all I read in a letter my parent’s wrote to me last week (must be when FF re-read the letter) that my father knew daddy from the cattle markets. From the auctions. And daddy knew my father. When I wrote to them, my mother was so excited you know, that I am away and found somebody so to speak from home. They were so happy, they just couldn’t believe it. At home they would have never allowed me. At home I was engaged and not-engaged (to a doctor). Well I went steady for three years.
SF: Do you have any other stories from your childhood?
FF: I don’t know, I might have but I don’t remember right now.
SF: How about my father’s?
FF: Daddy had a lot of good memories. Daddy came from a good town where there were a lot of decent people and he had help from a gentile man to come out. They were very good to him. Very, very much nicer people than where I come from. He had to work from when he was 12 or 13 years old. He had a hard life. He never had vacation or anything like that. He sent everybody else but not himself. His mother would do anything for him. When I was pregnant he wanted to wash the floors. I said “Why should you wash the floors?” He said “I used to do it for my mother.” I said “Well, you’re not doing it for me.” He did everything for his mother. He was very good to his mother. Very good to his mother. See, when you’re good to your mother, you’re good to your wife. I think I’ll put the air conditioning on.
Ruth: That definitely is true.
SF: Do you remember your sister’s weddings at all?
FF: Yah. I remember my oldest sister’s wedding first. It was such a big spiel. It was a wedding in a hotel and I was six years old. I think I must have been eight years old. I was born in 1912 and my sister got married in 1920. I was eight years old. It was such a big wedding and such a clamorous thing that I said to my mother when I was eight years old that would never happen to me. I had to say a speech. I had two pigeons in my hand. They were made out of paper mache. I had to make a whole poem I had to say. Ida had to say something too. I didn’t want to do it. I never liked that, but I had to do it. There was a big dinner and we stood in this hotel. It was a big to do. Ruth’s mother wanted to be married at home in our house, and it was in the winter. In February or whatever, in the snow. It was so beautiful. We were taken to the temple where the ceremony was in the coach with the two horses and it was a beautiful ceremony. It was really.... Ida’s mother cooked the meal. We had ducks. That was a delicacy you know. It was really beautiful...-----phone rings and Ruth goes to answer.
SF: Was Sigbert bar mitzvahed?
FF: Yah, I don’t remember that anymore, would you believe it. I don’t remember it. Many times I think of it and I can’t remember it. I don’t know why. Maybe I don’t want to, but I can’t remember it. It hurts me very much to think about him. It really does because he was like a brother. He was the last person I saw when I left Germany because he came on the train. See when I went into Paris, to France, and where he was in Karlsruhe was the last station in Germany when I knew that my trunks didn’t come through. I saw them being disconnected. He was the last person I saw and it hurts me really bad.
SF: Tell me about some of the things in the house like where did the picture of the old man....
FF: This here? I got this as a present. I got this from a professor in school. (He gave it to me) because he liked me. When I graduated he gave it to me. From High School. Yah. Dr. Zeigler.
SF: Where did the scarf from the Franco-Prussian war come from?
FF: There were people living just.... we went out of the house just like here, a little further apart between this and the neighbor here. They had no children. They were the ones who spoiled me to no end. They had an old mother and that old mother loved me to no end. To no end. See I was the youngest. The big ones had gone already. They gave me everything they could. You know that old silver thing there is from home too, that silver basket. (SF=What old silver basket?) And all those beckers. SF description--Rings come out from the middle with a flower in the middle. FF: That’s yours. SF: Was that your parents’? FF: Yah, they used it for Pesach. For fruit.
SF: This family lived next door to you.
FF: There was this old woman who really loved me, she was hunchbacked, and I loved her. And she gave me things and she gave me this and she said to me “This is my oldest, best possession.” She got it either from her husband or I don’t know from whom, who brought it to her. She says “I’m giving it to you. Promise me you never give it away. That’s yours. That’s yours. That’s all I can give you.” She gave me money too. She opened a bank account for me. She says “I want you to have that” and then she gave it to me.
SF: She gave it to you when you were ready to leave Germany?
FF: No, she died long before. She gave it to me before, when she was old and sick. She called me in and said “that’s for you.” She gave me that. She only had a daughter and a son-in-law. They knew. They were right there. Rosa was right there when she gave it to me. Nisset Elkin (was her name). Elkin was her last name. Elkan.
SF: Where did the little girl with the apple in her hand come from?
FF: My mother. See they are all things from home. My mother bought it for me when I went away to school and said that’s the way I should be. Nice and quiet and polite. I wanted to become like this but it wasn’t in my genes. They wanted to hold me down with anything and never made it.
SF: Did you have any early idols, people you looked up to?
FF: Like my teachers. The young teacher I liked. I liked a lot of boys. Like a young girl does. I never saw a movie home. The first movie I saw when I came away to school and I thought the best seat is in front and I had to sit in front like this and I nearly broke my neck.
SF: Was there a paper in town?
FF: Oh, yeah, we had a few papers. We had the Nürnberger Zeitung (newspaper), we had the Frankfurter Zeitung, and we had the Wörnitz Boden. Wörnitz that was the flood, the lake, yah, fluß (flooss), what’s a fluß? A river went through.
SF: But there wasn’t anything in town. How many people were in Wittelshofen?
FF: 700. (Note: probably closer to 200, certainly about 200 now). I always said a thousand because I really didn’t want to say something. About 15 or 20 Jews (not families, people). I told you all the young ones were gone. There were just five families. There was us, the Weinschenks, and the Oberdorfers and the Gallingers and the Eisens. Five families. That’s all there was when I left. (Nearby towns) had a bigger Jewish population. Some of them had a big Jewish population.
SF: Why did you father settle in Wittelshofen?
FF: His parents and his grandparents. That was used to be 60, 70 (Jewish) families there. They had their own temple and everything. People died and the young ones went away to school and learned something and settled somewhere else. They had families. Some young ones married in town and they couldn’t make a good living so they moved to the city. Same thing was happening then as is happening now. I think we did enough for today.
Leo: Same thing by us too. 15 families. But they all moved away too. Gross Eichelsheim. And then there was Klein Eichelsheim was close. It was half as big. There was Jewish people there too. It is in Baden between Mannheim and Würzburg. If you know where this is. In Odenwald.
SF: You didn’t know my father in Germany?
LK: I only heard from your father from a cousin, from der Lehman.
FF: We eat dinner in the house. And then your (Ruth’s) uncle was sitting next to me and he offered me a cigarette. I was pretty young and I didn’t want to say no and I really wanted to know what a cigarette tasted like. So he gave me a cigarette and I took it and my mother got up from the table and gave me one look, like this..., and I put that cigarette down and never touched a cigarette ever. Never. Then my mother said to me (I didn’t want to say no) she says “Look, a fine girl does not smoke. I don’t care who hands it to her. If it is a doctor or the mayor or whoever it is, I don’t want you to smoke” and I never smoked. She how you listen.
Then your parents went to honeymoon. I went with your mother who bought a creptescine (sp?) nightgown. It was so beautiful. Oh, it was so beautiful. I used to say “What do you need such a thing for.” So she said she wanted a creptescine nightgown. My oldest sister went and got married, Bianca’s mother. They asked her what she wants best before she got married. So she said she wants me to sleep with her before she gets married, the last two nights. She loved me like a mother. So I slept with her for two nights and she had to bribe me with chocolate and everything under the sun, otherwise I wouldn’t do it. That was your parents. Then they moved to Munich and then they had this apartment and they fixed it up with a big bay and everything, and that was it. That’s enough now. I don’t want any more. It should be enough.
Oral History, Flora Frank, 8/11/84 Note with tape, translation of article. Neighborhood paper, date 10/15/82 In Wittelshofen, Heinrich Von Wittelshofen. Town named in 1275. Mostly Protestant town. People suffered from castle owner–robbed, etc.. . Town was named after Caste, built in 1275. In 1380, castle changed hands. Again several times. Farmers gave most to owner and complained. People revolted after a change in 1520 and burned down the castle. Farmers lost the battle and the castle was rebuilt by the farmers under force. Better than ever. Man made canal around the castle. 35 rooms, some very big for meetings and festivals. Large storeroom/warehouse is still there today (barns?) In debt and sold to Schlossheimer (cousin of Flora Winter’s grandmother) and Monheimer (grandmother of Flora Winter on her father’s side). Jews could not own land before. On 5/15/1856 the castle was burned by lightening. Built four family houses on the grounds with the insurance money. Still stone fence around and cellar exists. Flora Frank’s grandparents owned the garden but sold four of the 5 houses. They had the cellar as a basement.
Tape— Wittelshofen is near Dinkelsbuhl and Buttenwiesen is near Augsburg. Augsburg is about an hour and a half away from Munich. Neither near any borders.
SF: Could you describe Wittelshofen.
FF: Yeah. It was a very clean, small town about 700-1000 people living there and out of the 700, 695 were Nazis.
SF: What did the town look like.
FF: Lots of streets. There was one main street and otherwise lots of side streets in all directions. They were old houses and they were very good brick houses, most of them, and they all had flowers outside on the windowsills. Usually geraniums-white and red-it really was very clean. They were small shops. They were nothing big. We usually went to Dinkelsbuhl or to Nürnberg for shopping.
SF: Did my father ever describe Buttenwiesen.
FF: It was a bigger town than Wittelshofen and it was a nicer town. In the people it seems. They were very helpful people. In Wittelshofen they were about 8 Jewish families to my time and the others were all Protestants and no Catholic could ever come... Buttenwiesen was half Protestant and half Catholic so that was a more... They had more than a thousand people there.
SF: Is Buttenwiesen where they first made Budweiser beer? (Note: Later learned that Budweiser was first made in Budweis=Ceske Budjevoice, Czech Republic)
FF: I wouldn’t know.
SF: What did the schul in Wittelshofen look like?
FF: It was a big temple. Oh, that temple was hundreds of years old. I even have a picture of it. I don’t know where it is now, but I have a picture of it. It was a big temple and it was really nice. Then everybody moved away and then there was the big temple and nobody to go in. They didn’t have stained glass windows, they had plain windows but they were like, you know, in broken glass (?) .... There was a balcony for the women. The ark was up front and there were seats on the sides, all the way back. The men were downstairs and the women were upstairs.
SF: You had a rabbi in town?
FF: No, we had a teacher. The rabbi was in Ansbach and he came twice a year because my father was the, what do you call it, the head of the Jewish community...the president, and so he stood with by us. He also examined us in school. He was good. And then when the teacher, the lehrer, died then everything fell apart. They didn’t replace him. There were no more children there. All the children grew up. There were no young people except my sister, and then they moved to Munich and then those kids, Bianca and Sigbert. There were no more young people there. (SF Note: This may be an error. Bianca and Sigbert lived in Wittelshofen.)
SF: Did you keep kosher at home?
FF: Oh, you bet. Oh, you bet.
SF: Did you observe the holidays in a special way? For instance, what did your father do for Yom Kippur.
FF: He stood all the day in the temple with the s??? . . With the shroud. Never sat down. All day long. He stayed the whole day, and everybody fasted. We had to bus people in from somewhere else in order to have minyan because we didn’t have ten people (Note: probably means men) anymore. So we had to bus people in and they stood by us most of the time.
SF: How about for Passover.
FF: Then we didn’t have any minyan. We didn’t have any minyan then anymore. We had two nights of Seders. Each one had their own. We had my sister and my brother-in-law and Bianca and Sigbert. We had a beautiful Seder plate. An old Seder plate made out of wood, and it was all hand carved. It was beautiful. My sister in Munich had a silver one. A crystal one. That was really beautiful. We would sit on the chair like this and there was the pillow. Ooh, I got the pillows. I got the pillow cases here. They were beautiful(ly) hand made. It was just very, very beautiful. (SF Note: We have two of those pillow cases.) I was the only one who never sat through, because my father couldn’t give a nice Seder, he couldn’t sing or anything. So that was never.... it was everything done, but it was never done real singing because he had no voice.
SF: What did you do on a typical shabbat?
FF: The women and the men went to temple in the morning every Saturday, with the hat on and the gloves on and everything. Pocketbook. And we were home. We just did everything we weren’t supposed to do. Go in the fields. I told you what I did with the flowers. Didn’t I tell you? You couldn’t get flowers from the ground, because you couldn’t tear it on Shabbos, you know. We had big gardens and the gardens had such beautiful flowers and...I went with Ida and my girlfriend in England (Note: Selma.) who just died and the monster (of the?) the field flowers was a pink velvet flower and it was so beautiful that I wanted to bring it to my mother but it was Shabbos and how could I get it off? So I laid on the floor and I bit it off, and brought it to my mother and I said to my mother, everything I could I gave to my mother, and I said “Momma, look what I got for you” and she said “Where did you get it? You get this on Shabbos?” and I said “Yeah, I didn’t get it like this, I bit it off.” Every Friday night we had flowers on the table, every Friday night, winter and summer. My mother always had flowers... in the winter you had to take them in you know, because there was all this cold weather and all that. She only had flowers for that reason, because we always had flowers on Shabbos. They were big. I think we were the only house that had it.
SF: You had a special dinner Shabbat night?
FF: Yeah, chicken usually. That was a delicacy. Berches. Potato salad. (For desert...) It was the best. It was made out of yeast dough, challah dough, Berches dough. Then she made it with blueberries, with apples. Yeast dough. It came out baked. In a black iron pot (cobbler?) . It was good. She was the best cook???? She used to pull me in by the hand. You would be surprised how much you learned anyhow. And I didn’t want to do any housework ever.
SF: You said you were the only Jewish family in town that had a telephone.
FF: Yah, in the beginning. Then the others, some of them got it too. Around 1920. No it must have been earlier. My sister got married in 1920 and she had a phone and we had a phone. It must have been about 1918.
SF: What other appliances did you have?
FF: That was about all. Everything else was done by hand. Washing by hand. Then we had one thing nobody had. It was called a mangle. It was a machine like this, also hand done. When you had your sheets you didn’t have to iron them. You folded them together and let them through. There were two round, heavy things and they pressed it. We were the only in town who had it. My mother had all those modern things.
SF: Did you have a wood stove?
FF: No. We had a beautiful stove. On the platter of the stove. . It used coals and wood. We had a platter, it was shiny like stainless steel. It was always shiny.
SF: How did you keep food?
FF: We had was is called a schpice. See our house, as I explained to you before, was built on the ruins of a castle. It was very cold. The cellar was extremely cold. From the kitchen we had a small room where we had a closet in there and it had a screen in front and that room was so cold, what they did to it I don’t know. That’s where we kept the food and sometimes it even like froze. There was no stream there. It came from the cellar up that cold.
SF: Were there any other fast days?
FF: There was Tisha B’Av. There was Erev Pesach. My father was the first born and the only son where he fasted on Tisha B’Av and 17th of Tammuz, Shivos of Tammuz. They fasted. Tisha B’Av we fasted the whole day, since I was 12 years old.
SF: Are there any other traditions that you remember?
FF: Chanukah. My father went around the table when we sang Mo’oz Tzur Yuh Shu Oh See, always around the table. Why I don’t know. He took me by the hand and walked around the table. He had a pewter menorah. It had lions on it. They had to be lit with oil and a wick. (SF: Was he the only one who lit it? Did the women light it?) No. Are you kidding? In Europe? (SF: Did you get a present?) Every day. Not every day. But my birthday was around Chanukah. Nobody got every day. I think we were the only Jewish people who did give each other presents. My birthday presents, Chanukah presents...
SF: What types of standard food did you have?
FF: We had pot roast. My mother made a lot of pot roast. Don’t forget we had three people as help so we always had to cook a lot. My mother made loaves of bread for Friday. She made three challahs and two loaves of bread and that lasted the whole week. It was baked once a week. You made it and then it was brought in the bakery. They baked it for you. They knew exactly which was yours and which wasn’t yours. That was the whole thing for the week. Then we had everything in the garden. My mother used to say “Go out and get lettuce. Go out and get this and get that...” and that’s what we did. It was a good life. It was a real home life.
The women did their sewing. Their own sewing. Most of them did their housework. My mother did a lot of baking. Did a lot of stuff for poor people. Brought food, a lot of food, in the plastic with the leaves on top. (SF: Why with leaves?) I used to save the leaves into the plums and I had to bring it to the poor house. I said to momma “Why do you do that?” and she said “People should think that it was done with love, not just given. They should feel good when the see those baskets.” In the meantime, they didn’t even care what it looked like as long as they got it. (SF: There was a regular poor house.) There were people who lived there. There were two families. It was not Jewish. They were poor people and, you know, whoever had a little more than the next one... We, especially we... I never forget the steps to go up. I used to say “Momma, I don’t want to go there. You break your foot.” So my father belonged to the town council. He arranged that those steps were fixed because he says “I want this done.” They had a big writeup. Because he believed that. That’s where they had ....
SF: There are a lot of things at home like doilies and things.
FF: Yeah, my mother used to do that when she was younger but she didn’t believe on that anymore. She used to say “Who needs it? Who goes around and washes and irons and starches?”
SF: Did any of the women do jobs?
FF: No.
SF: You were in the choir?
FF: Yah, in the gentile choir. In the church choir. We sang once in the temple. Bianca’s father arranged it and we sang on yontif in the temple.
SF: Tell me about the time your father snipped off the cross.
FF: I played in the Christmas pageant. But it wasn’t anything real gentile, it was just a Christmas pageant. I played the queen. I had to wear a crown. My hair was all like gold and long up to here and it opened up. It was really good. I had to wear a crown. You had to go for rehearsal with the crown on and I had trouble because my hair was so thick and the elastic constantly snapped off. So then I had to put the whole hair and put the thing underneath so my mother had to lengthen the wire and I had to take it home. So the next day when we played, this girl said to me “There’s something wrong with your crown.” I said “What’s wrong with it? I just took it home to have the wire put on, lengthened.” She said “There’s something not right.” The cross was snipped. It was just the length. Not this way. The stick was up but not the cross. “So” I said “Well I don’t know what happened. .” Nobody saw it, nobody said anything, nobody even realized it and I didn’t make anything out of it. On the way home I said “Something really terrible happened. Did you see what happened to my cross” My father looked ... I said “Papa, did you do it?” and he said “Yes.” “Why didn’t you tell me?” “Because I know what you would have done.” He says “I don’t want you to wear a cross. As long as nobody says anything. Even if they would have said something I would have explained that. So it went fine and that’s all there is.”
SF: Did you go on vacations? Skiing and stuff?
FF: Yeah. We went to Italy. We went to Switzerland. Skiing. In Italy we didn’t go skiing. That wasn’t from home anymore, that was from Munich. I went away when I was 12 years old. I didn’t have much chance. I helped a lot in the fields. I loved to do the field work. I used to feed the cows. My father extra had for me some young animals, they were like young bulls. They had about four of them. And goats. I learned to milk on a goat. My mother said you have to know everything and I wouldn’t go near a cow. So my father got me a goat. I never forget I had red velvet house slippers. Not realizing what I do I went down with the red velvet house slippers and here I had to milk a goat.
SF: Were any of your father, grandfather in the military?
FF: My father was in World War I. In the infantry.
SF: Was your grandfather in the Franco-Prussian War? FF: I have no idea.
SF: Were there any special medical things that you remember?
FF: No, we were all as healthy as a horse. Nobody was ever sick as long as I remember. Ever.
SF: How about on my father’s side?
FF: His father had asthma, and he stopped working when he was 42 years old. It was at times very bad. Daddy supported the whole family. He rode with the bicycle. Every time he wanted ... his mother promised him next time he can buy a motorcycle and every time he had the money together his father started building towards the house. They had the most beautiful house in town.
FF: My father was in town politics in Wittelshofen.
SF: Who sent the castle article. FF: Yeah, the Germans who are still there. It is not a friend. They took the history of the town. It was a historian. There is a girl there, she is as old as Bianca. They are very nice people. They are elderly people. She sent it to Ida.
SF: Were the Jews in Wittelshofen very assimilated or were they kept separate?
FF: No, they were very assimilated...until the Nazis came.
SF: Was that recent? The history of the Jews in Germany is that they suffered persecution through time.
FF: No we didn’t. Not that I remember. Everything was fine until the Nazis came.
SF: Your grandmother lived with you for a while?
FF: Forever. Yah. My father’s mother. See my father was the only child and so my mother married into the house. My mother came. . What happened is this. My mother’s parents died and my mother was the youngest. Then she moved from a small town near Würzburg to a little city near Nürnberg because her sister and her brother-in-law lived there. He was a teacher there. She lived with them until she got married. So my mother acquired all the city ways of living so when she was introduced to my father, before they wrote to the teacher in our town to find out about the family. To find out what the family is like. You know they used to do that. He wrote back that the Winter family is a very well known family, they are very nice people and they are pretty well to do, the only bad part is that there is red hair in the family. So this wasn’t so easy to overcome. My mother didn’t mind about that so my mother married in. They had this in all the old house there. Before you went up the stairs, the bedrooms were up the stairs, and underneath the stairs there was a chicken coop. There were chicken living in the house. My mother said “I will not live with animals under the same roof. Those chickens have to go. I will not move in this house with animals.” So before they got married, they built chicken coops to put chickens out because my mother said she wouldn’t move in there. She came from a city. What are you going to do, live with animals in the house? So they took the chickens out. Then my mother fixed up the house.
You should see the wedding picture, my mother was a very beautiful woman. My grandfather was crazy about my mother an my grandmother got very jealous. She tried to hurt my mother wherever she could. The way you were brought up, you never answered back to elders. My mother’s mother died when my mother was very young so she wanted to be especially nice to my grandmother but she didn’t take it nice. Then my father said “There is one thing I’m going to tell you. Either you leave my wife alone and appreciate her and act like she is my wife, otherwise we move out.” He says “I can get another house tomorrow, I will not stand for it ” So then she changed. But she still...when my two sisters were born...
Sf: You said your grandfather was alive then too?
FF: I didn’t know my grandfather. He died when I was very young. Either before I was born or when I was a very small baby. I never met him. But he must have been a very good man. (My father and mother) moved in with both his parents and they had the nicest room in the house, the grandparents. That’s what you did. That was the rule. That was the respect. When my second sister was born my grandmother was very mad that it wasn’t a boy. When I was born she was very happy. She didn’t know what was coming. My two sisters were so good to her, but not me. I know she wasn’t nice to my mother so I wasn’t nice to her.
The castle burned down when my grandparents built the house. The living quarters were downstairs and the bedrooms were upstairs. My sisters were young and they got married when I was young. (My father) bought the house where Bianca’s parents lived and Ida’s mother lived downstairs. She got the milk from us. She got the eggs from us.
SF: You said Ida was illegitimate?
FF: Yah, don’t tell Ida. I tell you what happened. When she went to school she was still Ida Bravman and then my father, don’t ever, ever whatever you do tell, had to go with her, with Ida’s mother, to the city, to Dinkelsbuhl to the court, because her husband died, was killed in the war and she had those two children where she would get the pension for. So my father said to her “It’s about time you have that child written over to the same name. It gives you less trouble and less questions and later on its easier for the child to...” and so that’s what she did. She used to say me when she was five and when she was seven “I went to my mother’s wedding, you didn’t.” SF: She had a sister? FF: Yah, younger. She was. (can’t hear...)
SF: My father’s mother was a Frank before and after she was married. Were they related?
FF: No. Not at all. It just happened.
SF: Did my father have any pets when he was young?
FF: They had a dog. They even had a picture taken with the dog. You saw the picture.
Like you have a master here, that he could have.... He apprenticed with his father (SF: But his father stopped working). It was always on his father’s name. That’s why I don’t get any pension. See, this is how his mother wrote. His father still owned the business. He worked there but his father didn’t. You know, you had such respect that you never wrote it over to... You know that.
SF: Is this the passport you used to leave Germany? FF: Yeah. From Stuttgart.
SF: What does it say here?
FF: Wittelshofen. There I was born the 30th. Wohnort(residence) Stuttgart. That’s why I had to go to Stuttgart, to get my papers. See my Wohnort was Wittelshofen but I had to get it there. Mittel. That means I’m medium size. My face is oval. My eyes are gray and my hair is red.
(On Siegfried’s passport it says) he was a butcher and he was born in Homburg on Main. He was very small, and then in 1903, when they got married, they moved to Buttenwiesen. Also his figure is mittel and his face is also oval and the eyes are blue/gray and the hair is dark and any marks, he had none.
That’s his master. That he made his master. See if he would have stayed in butcher out there, he could have had help like he could have taught some young people. See, I just want to show you what happened. Here he had to already be called Israel. Not me. I went earlier. I didn’t have to be called. Every Jew had to be called Israel. See. Had by Hermann Frank learned. Three years. But you had to make this in front of butchers. (Notes signatures of people who gave him a test or something.) He had the nicest house in Buttenwiesen. He always said it and the people from Buttenwiesen said it. Sorry to say they are dead now. That’s what daddy said. That every time he had some money saved it went into the house. He had such fights with his father. It must have been a beautiful house. After the Hitler time, when they sent the money for the house, he said ‘I don’t accept it. This was the nicest house in town and I want to be paid right” and they sent more money. See, he would have gone after them. He would have gone out. He said once to me “I go out. I want what’s coming to me. I worked too hard or it” and I used to say “You have go alone without me, with out.” He says “I go. Because” he says “they owe it to me. I’m not going to let it go.” Not like me. I let everything go.
SF: What happened? It got turned over to the Jewish relief agency?
FF: Ya. Ya. They used that money to resettle refugees. “Maccabee, come here honey.”
SF: Was my father’s home just a house or a farm? Were there a lot of Jews in Buttenwiesen.
FF: It was a house. There were a lot of Jews. (He kept kosher). Everybody kept kosher.
SF: But you didn’t keep kosher here.
FF: I started out keeping kosher. Then he used to get steaks for nothing. Then I changed.
SF: How are we related to the Baums?
FF: Ruth Baum? That was from my father’s side too. My grandmother. Remember Uncle Moritz, Ruth’s father? His mother and my grandmother were sisters. My father and Moritz were first cousins.
SF: Were you in Wittelshofen during the Depression? During the Inflation?
FF: Ya. (Her father built a barn and bought a piano). I was very young. Me (the inflation) never affected. Not the family either because we had all the eggs and the cows and everything. The people came form the city to us. “Maccabee come here.” Uncle Leo can tell you about the inflation. If there was a depression I didn’t know.
Sf: You said at age 12 you went away to school. Was that unusual? Where did you go?
FF: Very unusual. Nürnberg. Those relatives which we supported during the War and Depression with food and everything, they said that they always wanted me. That I can go to school from there. But they didn’t treat me nice. They became very rich. They were in the hopf (hop) business, you know hops, to make beer. He was such a good man but he was always on the go and she was home. They had two maids and they didn’t treat me right. They didn’t treat anybody right, they didn’t treat the help right either, but they had a heck of a lot of money and... From there I didn’t have far to go to school. Four or five. I went to school six years. I want to tell you something, that’s about 50 years ago and I can’t remember. The funny part was, because I hated to go back to them, I moved out though. (Then I lived) with friends and there I was forever. Till I left. I used to carry the coals up. They rented out rooms. We paid them too. We paid them a heck of lot of money and I got weaker and weaker and my father took me to the doctor because it affected my eyes and everything and they said we can’t believe it but this child is undernourished. It was just terrible. The uncle had nothing to say. He was always gone. He was buying this hopf. In fact he used to bring me presents all the time. He used to say “You don’t look happy. You don’t sound happy....” “I am happy” I used to say.
(I went to) Hebrew school every day. We went home and we changed and we went to Hebrew school. Three hours. I went there until I was finished with school.
SF: What did you do after you were finished with school?
FF: I went to Munich and I worked in the butcherei by the Bamburgers. I had a job in München which was like a house....? I had to do the cooking because they were very religious and we had gentile help. But they couldn’t touch the cooking so I had to do the cooking but she helped me with cooking. I loved to do the butcher shopping. He used to say, he had two children, Martin who was married in Baltimore, who we visited him many times, and the daughter who lived in New York. I mean she, she moved after Hitler...she lived in Nürnberg and from there they moved to Schletlinberg(sp?) in Holland and then when Hitler came they moved here. That’s the one I visited once and, I told you, she never spoke to me again because I told her daddy worked on Shabbos. She said “You never should have told me” and I said “Why shouldn’t I tell you. God sees what it is.” (SF: Did you know the Bamburgers before hand.) FF: No, my sister knew them. Ruth’s mother. He used to say to me “If I ever give my business up, you’re going to get it.” I said to him “Herr Bamburger, I would never ever.... It was a butcher shop. Then I went to the Weils. After that, when they to close (?) , I went home for a while. Then I went from relatives to relatives and then I wanted to get my papers and I couldn’t get the papers and I had to get the papers so I went to Stuttgart. They wanted me and I went there to get the papers and treated me like.... I was discussing it yesterday with Evelyn. No, this morning. I had to call him Herr Weil, and I was like a house tochter (daughter), like they say you didn’t get paid much. They didn’t even pay social security. If I wouldn’t have gone there I couldn’t have gotten my papers because they didn’t send them back to town so I had to go there. They had me in their hands.
SF: Who sent the 20 mark gold piece to my bar mitzvah?
FF: You mean that time, many years ago? The Weinschenks lived next door to us. They had no children. To them I was their child. (SF: She’s the one who gave you the scarf?) FF: that’s the mother of them. She gave it to me, she told me never to give it away, that was her prize possession. The daughter had no children, that’s why the mother gave it to me. The old mother. She died. She was high in the 80s. Rosa Weinschenk, that was her children, and David was her son and he lived near Stuttgart and he had a knitting factory and he married a non-Jewish woman and he sent the gold piece because, during the war, I sent him packages and he felt he wanted to do that. That was nice. He was very generous. I still got some (letters? ...) He used to say “What would we do without you.” Then when they could get it, he wrote and said “Don’t send any more. We get enough.”
SF: At one point you talked about a teacher of yours who pulled out your hair?
FF: That was in Streicher’s school. Because I called out ????? . It was with Streicher. It was Streicher and he had another teacher with him. And he went there and pulled me, and the guy went like this and I got seven stitches. They didn’t let me go home. I didn’t sleep and I was all stuck with blood (lots of stuff missing here.) Streicher was a Jew hater. He wrote “Der Stürmer,” the paper. He pulled me out ????? just because I didn’t ????? I never forget that as long as I live.
SF: Do you remember preparing to leave? What happened?
FF: I couldn’t leave. I couldn’t get my papers. I couldn’t stay home because my mother said to me “You have to leave because you get yourself and us in trouble” because I couldn’t believe what happened. When they threw down the silver thing, when they came and broke the windows. They came to the house and they wanted money. My mother opened the drawer and she says “We don’t have any money home” so they took the thing and they threw it upside down and then they went and then they took the leather weight my uncle gave me. It was such a beautiful one. I always wanted to replace it but every time I get to it I can’t buy it. Then they shot the dogs. Then I cried and my mother said to me “You’re gonna cry for the dogs. You’re gonna cry for yourself someday soon, and for us.” Then they went to the window and threw it through the window. By us was everything on hills. They threw the silver ladle, and this... (SF: Did they confiscate a lot of things.) FF: At that time they didn’t. They just threw everything out. They didn’t take anything away. It was in 1937. I just stood there. I couldn’t believe it. I just couldn’t believe it. There were three (Nazis). In regular dress. My mother said “Kind, you have to leave because you bring yourself.... I took one arm and I said “Get out of here.” I just couldn’t believe it. I said “I can take it.” So he turned around and looked at me. I said “I can take it. I can beat the life out of you. Who do you think you are, breaking into houses like this?” He turned around and he went like this, like to say “You’re going to get it next.” My mother saw that. I couldn’t believe it. I just couldn’t.
SECOND SIDE OF TAPE—DOES NOT PICK UP FROM END OF FIRST. STARTS IN MIDDLE OF SENTENCE. NOT SURE WHY.
...dollar and she said that Simon, her brother, will send it to me immediately.
SF: You needed a guarantee of a job.
FF: No. I needed an affidavit. It said that the person who gives you the affidavit is responsible for you. In case you come and you get sick, he has to take care of you. You’re not supposed to be a ward to the state or country. So then I didn’t hear and didn’t hear so Gretl Weil sister-in-law came also here and she called up Aunt Saler and she said to her “Flora is waiting for an affidavit from your brother, and if he can’t give it then my brother-in-law (Note: meaning Herbert Winter, brother of Gretl Weil) would it to me to bring it back so she says “Well, my brother would give it to her immediately but my sister wrote that Flora has trouble with her knees and she’s going to be trouble for him.” This is something I don’t even think you should put on the tape. This was my mother’s niece, Aunt Saler’s sister, who lived in a small town, also near Stuttgart and she had a breast operation and they were, at one time, very rich. Then he gambled everything away and then they were very poor and she was very sick. She wrote to my parents that they should help her and I should please come. My mother said “Please go there. You do a big mitzvah.” That was when I was in-between, you know. So I went there and helped her and she was sick that time and came home from the hospital, and I took care of her. He was a real woman chaser that was part of why they lost a lot, because he had to pay off girls. Then wherever he was he puts his arm around me and first I thought....then all of a sudden he wanted to get fresh so I got very panicky. My cousin was upstairs in the bedroom and I was down there and I prepared a meal and all this. Then the doctor came, Dr. Mertzbach and visited her every so often. I had trouble with my foot because when I was very young I fell in skiing and my knee got water, in the kneecap was full of water. I said to him “Dr. Mertzbach, I have trouble with my foot. What am I supposed to do?” He says “I want to tell you something. Your cousin is well enough to take care of herself and you have to go to the consulate in time to come. You better go home and nurse your foot. Otherwise you never make it.” When I told her that Dr. Mertzbach said I really should go home now. You’re well enough. You go to café every afternoon grenzien(?) and all that so I’m going to go home.” Because I paid all her bills she didn’t like that and she wrote to Simon that I’m going to be a risk for him. Irene who came here said “Flora has trouble with her knee. That’s a new one on me. What kind of a thing is this. Forget about your brother. I bring her one from Herbert.” She sent me one from Herbert and they sent me one from Detroit. Then I had two.
Then I started working at it and the first thing I needed the birth certificate and couldn’t get the birth certificate because he says he’s not going to give Jews birth certificates. So I didn’t know what to do. I got very panicky. Bianca’s mother corresponded with Aunt Gretl. So she says “Aunt Gretl would love to have you. Then you be right there. If you’re away from here and write for your birth certificate, he has to mail it. He has to send it, yet.” I mean later on they probably could do what they want. So I went to Stuttgart and I wanted to take a lawyer first. Then I went to one of those organizations, whatever they were and they said “we write for you and, if not, you have to take a lawyer” because he has to hand it out. That’s how I got my birth certificate in Stuttgart. They had me in their hands and I stood with them because I needed them. That’s how I got the affidavit. And that’s all. Then I went to the consulate and they let me go through like nothing.
SF: There’s some story about somebody not wanting to give you the papers? A girl that you grew up with.
FF: That was in the post office. Well see what happened was this. The affidavit came to, the papers came to my home town. When Irene came back she wrote to me or called me up, I forgot now what it was, and she says “Your papers must come any day.” I went there and I wanted to get the papers and I saw something laying there with stamps on it, like American stamps. So I said to her “There is my mail. Give it to me.” She says “We don’t hand the mail to Jews. There was this post office. It had the door like this, half the size. Here they gave you the mail and here on the bottom, that’s where they opened up to hand you the packages. She said “I’m not giving it to you.” So I pushed my foot in like this and I went underneath and I threw her in the corner and I said “You give it to me. Otherwise you and me, none of us is going to come out alive here.” Then she handed it to me. Then I threw her in the corner.
SF: Then you went home and got packed?
Then I went home and then I had to go for the birth certificate. No I didn’t get packed because I had to find out first how long it takes with the affidavit. You don’t get it right away. That takes a long time. They had to inquire. That took months and months. It took a year. A year and a half. That’s what happened. Then the Weils left and I was then I wasn’t even sure then that I get it. Then I wouldn’t know where to go in Stuttgart because the Lowenthals, Saler and Weils left at the same time. Then three or four days before this wonderful man came from the (Bureau of Records) and he says to me “I saw you were so nervous and I figured it takes a while. I’m going to give it to you.” He brought me my passport. He was such a fine man. He says “I hate to see what’s going on but what can I do?” He was a wonderful man.
SF: So then you went home and packed?
FF: Then I went home and I wanted to pack. They wouldn’t take my packages on the mail. The post office wouldn’t take my mail. Wouldn’t take my package. We didn’t have trunks made. We had the steamers. The regular steamers. I had to ship it to Munich because it has to be inspected and there was no one who would ever come home to inspect it. You couldn’t go from there. In the meantime we had still two horses and we had still our wagon. We were the only ones who had a wagon, where we loaded the cows in to bring it to the markets. So we loaded the trunks and we brought it to where Herta comes from, to that city, to that town (Note: Wassertrüdigen), because we didn’t have any railroad where we came from and the post office wouldn’t mail it. So we brought it there to the railroad and then they shipped it to Münich, to Ruth’s parents and from there on I went.
In Munich Ruth’s father got me the trunks. They had to be made to certain specifications and he did it. I had in there two or three winter coats, a winter suit, my leather coat with fur on the bottom and fur on the neck, and I can’t tell you what else. My God what... My mother came to Munich. She wanted to see me packing. This man who packed was so good. He say’s...We had to pack it down where my sister lived, in the washroom. You had to give them a certain place. So he says “I’m going out for lunch now. I be back in an hour. I have to go to lunch. I be back in an hour.” He left everything open. There was no seals. People used to tell me that they had iron straps around, metals straps around. You could put in whatever you want. My mother came to Munich and I said at that time “Momma, what are you carrying?” She says “A few things.” My mother went down and put....I couldn’t go near it. I couldn’t go near the packing. I couldn’t care what they put in. Ruth’s mother went down. She says to me “You don’t even know what you have. Go down.” I said “I couldn’t see.” I couldn’t see anything from home being taken and given to me. Like my mother wanted to give me the candelabra and they lit it every Friday night. I said “Momma, I can’t take it. How can I enjoy it when I know...” And I wasn’t married then so how do I know I ever need it. I said “Momma, I can’t take it. I just can’t take it” and I wouldn’t. This silver ladle I took because I said “This will always remind me of what it was.” My mother said “You have to have it fixed.” I said “No. Its going to remind me. I never have it fixed.” Someday when you get it you can have it fixed if you want.
SF: What’s wrong with it?
FF: Its banged up from...
SF: This is the one they threw through the window?
FF: Yah, and I went down to get it. I nearly broke my neck going down. It was so steep you know. I have something else here. I never even knew I had it. When I got married I emptied the thing....Well, no, I never got my trunk. That was a big, brown trunk with the initials on FW and when I went from...I wanted to go from Karlsrühe into France because Bianca’s brother learned to be a baker. You had to learn a trade, you know. He was there to say goodbye to me and I wanted to see him once more. He was my everything really. He was like a brother to me. I looked out of the train and I didn’t see my... they disconnected certain wagons and I looked and looked and I saw a lot of trunks on that one wagon and it didn’t go into France. (In it)were my winter coats and my clothes in there. My coats, my skirts, my shoes.
SF: And stuff your mother put in too?
FF: No. No. That was the trunk, all clothes. I really don’t know anymore what was in it. I had a big trunk. That I didn’t even see. That I did not see. That was direct going to the boat or something. I really don’t know what was... That had metal strips around it and all that kind of stuff.
I went to Paris. I had a boyfriend there. Before I left my father, who could not stay in the room with me alone, whenever he came in he cried. He said to me “I want you to promise me in my hand that you will leave France. Once you leave you have to leave Europe and you have to promise me. You cannot stay in Paris.” Because he knew I liked that man very much. He was a veterinarian. He says “You have to leave Europe and you promised me that and a promise is holy.” I come to Paris on Friday and Leubrecht(sp?) was very fromm (pious, religious) and I look out the window and all of a sudden he threw a big bunch of flowers at me. It was already Shabbos. I said to myself “What am I going to do here now. Its late already.” It was a delay somehow. I figured I take a taxi because I knew which hotel I go to. That was all arranged. I said “How do you come on Shabbos?” He says “We gave in to a few things” he says. “That’s one of them.” We were happy to see each other and all that. Then he invited me to go to Friday night to his uncle who was a veterinarian in Paris. Dr. Leubrecht. (SF: How did you meet him?) In München. He was a friend of Martin Bamberg. He liked me then already and I liked him already. But he always said “Look, we have to leave. There is no sense getting serious here because who knows where luck goes” and I felt its true. Then after we were there and we ate, and they were very religious, very fine people, he says to him “Did you tell Fraülein Winter what’s what?” He says “No, no. Later.” So I felt very uncomfortable so I said....this is the first time I traveled on Shabbos too, because I couldn’t help it, so I said “How far is the hotel. I feel very uncomfortable traveling on Shabbos.” He says “When you’re in a strange country you do things you never thought you would do.” So we walked and I said to him “What did your uncle want you to tell me?” He says “Oh, I got a big surprise for you. A big surprise.” I was looking. I thought he was going to give me a ring or something. I said “What’s the surprise?” He said “You not going to leave here. You gonna stay here.” I said “What for?” He said “Because we got you Auffelhatsgennamt (sp?) We got you a paper that you can remain here.” He said it was “...very, very hard and we pulled a lot of strings to get that.” I said “You’re out of luck. I can’t stay here.” He says “What do you mean?” I said “I promised my father.” He said “Promises are broken.” I said “Not to my father. I would never break a promise (to him).” He says “You cannot do it to my uncle.” I said “I do it to you and I do it to your uncle. I promised my father. I cannot go back on my promise.” I said my father said it broke his heart for me to leave but I have to leave Europe. He said “That’s ridiculous. Nothing is going to happen here.” I said “My father doesn’t say ridiculous things. What my father says it is always true.” He says “Please don’t do that.” So we had to go to his uncle the next day on Shabbos. First we went outside to a big, big department store. We couldn’t go in because we couldn’t carry money. I carried every paper I had with me. Then his uncle said “Did you hear, did you hear?” I said. “Dr. Leubrecht. I don’t know how to tell you but I might as well tell you right away. I am not staying in Paris.” He got pale. He had a beard. He got so pale He says “I cannot believe it.” I said “I promised my father that I leave Europe.” So he says to me “If you promised. Das ist ein gebot (sp?)” he says. “And you have to fulfill it. I understand.” He understood but Leubrecht didn’t understand. He never wanted to understand it. I said to him “You come to America.” I said “I try if you want to come to America.” But he started to finish studying. He wanted to get done with it. So that’s how I got to America. Leubrecht was killed too. The whole family was killed I found out.
SF: You had money hidden in skis?
FF: In Switzerland. In skiing all the time. You put it in the skis. There was this shoemaker in München. His name was Mr. Lehrs. He did that for people. He opened the skis. As a shoemaker he knew how to do that. Like you put soles together. We went to Switzerland and the skis. You could never take the skis into the train. You know, there was extra provision outside to put it in. That’s how we went. Then we got there and there was a man, another Jewish man, Mr. Tzimitz (sp?) , who opened them. You couldn’t get smuggle money out from Germany. You were never allowed to legally... That was the only place you could put money. I didn’t know anybody in... You had to bring your own money in by yourself. (SF: you smuggled money into the banks in Switzerland?) FF: Yah, you got to Mr. Tzimitz and you had to pay Mr. Tzimitz something for opening your thing and he got a cut in there too. (SF: so you smuggled money in for later?) FF: You wrote to Switzerland that they should transfer it to America. That’s what happened and that’s where I lost it all.
SF: You lost it all?
FF: I lost it all. I paid it in Cuba. SF: That’s another story.
SF: Did your father study the Talmud or was he just observant and prayed?
FF: He prayed. He knew all that. He knew the Chumash and he knew all that. They went to shears (sp?) what its called to sit together on Saturday morning after the temple and they learned together. They did that, yah. Every week somewhere else. Most of the time in our house because it was the warmest house.
SF: Did anybody give you gifts when you left?
FF: Everybody. My sisters gave me rings which I gave to Bianca. I gave her the rings. They gave me jewelry. I lost some and some was stolen. My sisters gave me those birds. The birds they gave me. This little thing I got too. The little bowl up there and the birds I got. This I got from my mother (the girl with the apple) when I went to school. (The cat on the ball) I got from Paula and Beno. Here.
SF: How about the egg shaped bowl with the chickens?
FF: That’s worth a fortune. Don’t ever give this away whatever you do. (Mother gave it to me).
SF: How did my father get out.
FF: Daddy had a hard job. He got the affidavit through a gentile friend in Buttenwiesen who had relatives here. Through a relative here, his name was Frankenthaler, who was some kind of bigshot at the produce exchange. Once he got here he didn’t want to know anything about anybody. He got here (Frankenthaler) and he stood with Hella and Jack Lehman. They got him room and board. They helped him for that affidavit in that Frankenthaler because they got a roomer that time. They needed it to rent out rooms. Uncle Leo got him that job. Before he came he had the job already.
SF: Who gave him the affidavit?
FF: This man, his name was Frankenthaler, and some man I don’t exactly how that worked, a gentile man from his hometown who had relatives here, who wanted to help him or helped him, I can’t tell you exactly. But Hella and Jack Lehman went to that Frankenthaler who was related to Hella’s father and daddy’s mother, they were brother and sister, and he got them the affidavit and they went there because they know when daddy comes he will stay with them and pay them room and board and be baby sitter for Laura.
SF: How did my father end up in Dachau?
FF: Like everybody else. They came and they took you. Just because you were Jewish. ‘37. I got out in ‘37 and daddy got out in ‘38. No, I got out in ‘38 and daddy got out in ‘39.
He had trouble walking because they gave them shoes, all of them shoes, two numbers too small and in those two number too small shoes they had to march. Whoever couldn’t march they shot. (SF: How long was he in Dachau?) FF: I think two months. (SF: Did he ever talk about it?) FF: Yeah, oh God, did he ever talk about it. Terrible. He see so many people dying. There was one elderly Jewish man who died right in his arms. He just had to lay down. From marching and starvation. He couldn’t march because the numbers...that daddy’s feet... Do you remember his toes were so crippled? That was from that. He forced himself to do it.
SF: Did he have nightmares about it? FF: Oh God, I tell you something. It was unbelievable. He went like this all night (Note: FF showed arms flailing). That was already a year later or a year and a half later. Did he have nightmares. It was terrible. I wanted him to go to a doctor. He wouldn’t go. He says “You help me. You help me.” Oh he was hit and everything. It was terrible. SF: What was the food like? FF: I don’t know. If he ever (described it) I don’t know. They beat him. He got out because the mayor of his hometown was a friend of his and he (daddy) had a group, an athletic group. He was the leader of an athletic group. They all went to fight for him. They said “We want him out, we want him out” and they got him out. Somehow or another. They were different than by us. Then he got here.
SF: You said the Nazis came and took away your goods?
FF: We lived up the hill. They just took it down. What they did with you, where the loaded (it)... You couldn’t go to the window and look. They turn around and shoot you. SF: did they take your father’s wagon? FF: Not while I was there. 1938 and then the Kristalnacht was in October of 1938. I left in April. March or April. That was ‘38. Then they confiscated everything. They threw you out. I understood they took my parents and the Jewish people there to a prison. They had to walk. How they ever came from that prison to my sister in Munich I never found out because it was a big distance and I don’t think they had any money or anything. I don’t know. I just don’t know. I like to know that myself and never found out.
SF: Do you remember where you were when the war broke out?
FF: I was pregnant with you a week or two. December 7th. We had company. The Meyers. My thoughts were “Oh my God, I hope daddy doesn’t have to go and I hope I can hear from my parents. I hope they don’t break us up that I don’t hear from them anymore.” Then we wrote to them and we told them when you were born. Then I got a telegram. A Red Cross letter. Did I ever tell you that? I wrote them from the hospital when you were born, and also to my in-laws. My father always said to me “If we can’t write to you direct, we write with the Red Cross.” See, he was so smart that he knew all this but he still didn’t want to leave. He said “strenge hen redieren nicht mar (sp?)” –strong men will not last long. Everybody said that. They never thought that he would last long. So then I was nursing you and the mailman rang from downstairs. He lived up on top, on the third floor. Remember that? No, you were too small. I called down and said “What is it?” He said “Mrs. Frank I got a Red Cross letter” and I run down and he handed me the letter and I fainted. I thought it was a letter that my parents weren’t alive anymore and I fainted and I hit my head against the steps and I lost milk. You kept screaming and screaming and they wrote a letter in which they congratulated us for your birth and they said they were so happy that we got a boy, because I always wanted a boy. So that was the letter and I never had any milk and I went to the doctor, Dr. Wesley, and I said I can’t understand this child is crying day and night and he tried and he says “You’re all dried out. What happened?” I told him and he said “When you’re scared that can happen.” Then I had to put you on milk. You know, and all kinds of formulas, whatever that was. That’s why you turned out so good.
SF: What kind of persecution do you remember?
FF: They wanted to beat me but I never stood still long enough. Constantly name calling and all this.
SF: Was this the people in the town?
FF: Yah, they were not too bad to me. In fact there were some of the boys that I went to school with, to public school, and they came at night. We had around our house those big gardens and they came in the bushes, crawling, and they came up and they said “Don’t you leave Flora. We don’t want you to go. No one’s going to do anything to you. We don’t want you to go.” There were a few boys who said that. FF: I said no. What changed you...
SF: I thought you said people who you used to help were spitting at you?
FF: Yeah, the neighbors when I went down from my house to pass by. I had to pass by. She said “Heinele (fond term for Heinrich), what do you do when Flor passes by?” and he spit. That’s the only thing I wrote back to that mayor when he says I should come and visit or something. I wrote back to him, that’s the first time I wrote back to Wittelshofen, I said “What happened to those people?” And I wrote to which people I meant and he say’s they all died. Too bad. He says he remembers my parents very well. I even know who he was. He was a little boy. Maybe now in the 50s. He was a little kid then.
SF: You had several workers on the farm?
FF: Yah. We had those neighbors. We supported them and we gave them half of our gardens too. See our gardens went around five houses and that house was one of them and they didn’t have much garden on their own. So my father always said “Take care of it and whatever comes off the tree you take.” That’s what happened. They took it and then they turned against us.
FF: (The workers) helped with the hay. You had to get the grass off the ground and you had to work it and all that. Whatever you have to do on a farm they did. Our man lived above the barn because he had to feed the animals when you had the high snow. You couldn’t leave the house. The barns were just down the road but you couldn’t get out of the house. You couldn’t open the shutters. Sometimes two or three days. Always had enough stuff in the house because you couldn’t...you always had everything in the house anyway. That was a good time. That’s when you were home and the house was so nice and warm and all that. It was very comfortable. Very good.
SF: Two stories. One when you came home once and nobody wanted to light the fire because it was Shabbos and the other when you came home and there was a beggar there and you wouldn’t eat with him.
FF: That was when I went to high school. He was in the bus with me. We had no train. As I told you there was no train depot where I came from. The train went to where Aunt Herta came from, der Wassertrüdigen, and from there we had to take a bus. The bus went there twice a day, morning and afternoon. The trains met the bus. Otherwise sometimes you had to wait a half hour. So I went in the bus and there was this man with a black coat and a beard, and when we got closer to the town he says to me “where is the banas(?) ,” that means the president of the Jewish thing. So I said “Oh, that’s my father,” I said. So he says “Well how do I get to him?” I said “Oh, they’re going to be at the bus to pick me up so you can talk to him.” I went out before him because I didn’t respect this type of people. My father was already mad when he saw me going out before an old man. So I said “Papa, there is the Pollack who wants to talk to you” so my father said to him “What can I do for you?” He must have told him he is poor or whatever. I don’t know. My father said to him “You come home with me and we take care of you.” So I put my papa on the side and hugged and kissed him and I said “Papa, if this Pollack eats at our table, I’m not going to sit with him. I’m not going to sit at the same table as that Pollack sits.” My father just put me down and walked away, back to this man, and excused himself and went to this man. Before we up to our house he called my mother and he talked to my mother something. When I came home up there, oh God the maids were there with big hellos and the table was set so nice and always flowers on the table and a present, always a present when I came home. My mother used to hang the present on the window so that when I came up the hill I saw already that a present was waiting for me. You know that Tyrolean jackets or whatever. So I went in there and I wanted to take the present down and my mother said “Leave it here till later. Leave it here.” I thought “That must be a big thing that I have to leave it there. I can’t rip it apart right away.” Then my mother went out into the kitchen where the soup was steaming and everything, whatever there was. I don’t know anymore. I helped carrying it in. The soup by us was always served in a soup tureen. We never ladled it out. It was done in the kitchen and then you brought it in. Then my mother said “You take this plate. Take it out in the kitchen” so I took it out to the kitchen.
I was sure I said that I wouldn’t eat with that man on the table there so he is eating out there. I wanted to sit down and my mother said “No, you brought your place out there, that’s where you eat.” “Not me in the kitchen.” “Yes, you in the kitchen. You wouldn’t eat with this poor man, so you have to eat where he isn’t. That’s the kitchen.” There were the cats and there were the dogs and there was I, because our help always ate on the table. I cried and I cried and I cried so loud that my father just couldn’t help hearing it. Then he came out. He says “What is it?” “I have to eat here because this Pollack eats in there.” My father said “This is not a Pollack. This is a poor man, a poor religious man, and I want to tell you something right now. If this is why we sent you away, to come back as such a snot nose, then you aren’t going to go back. You stay home because you have to learn bringing up at home. They don’t do it, we will do it.” My father never spoke like this to me. He went in again and there I ate. I wouldn’t even go in to get more food. I wouldn’t go in and get my meat. Our help they were sitting there and they felt terrible. That’s where I had a terrible day. I had a few terrible days, and my mother said to me “If you learned a lesson, you can come back.” The next day I couldn’t eat there either. The man was gone but my mother said “You learned a lesson, if you learned a lesson.” But I came to Munich and every time a Pollack came like this, I felt the same way. Mr. Schindler was a real Pollack. He said to me “I am gonna bring you a Pollack. You’re gonna marry a Pollack.” I said “Mr. Schindler, don’t punish me, don’t say that. .” I don’t know. I never learned it at home. I never learned it at home. Just a terrible, terrible thing. I felt very bad.
SF: What about the fire?
FF: The fire? I came home and in between coming here and staying home, still waiting for my papers and all that, and it was very, very cold. God it was so cold. See I left in April or March and I was home for two months. It was winter. Winter. So we sat there and we sat there, my momma wrapped up in things. I said “Momma, that’s no good. If you get sick, you have no doctor. You can’t do it. So my mother said “I can’t lay in bed all the time.” We had no more help, we had no more maids, nobody you know. I said “I’m going to do something. I know it’s a sin but I’m gonna do it. Before you and papa get sick I’m gonna go out and make a fire.” My mother went like this but she said to herself “I wish she would do it.” I went out and I put in a fire and the wood was cracking and I went in and said “You’re gonna feel all right soon. I don’t feel good in doing it. I did it the first time in my life but you’re not going to get sick because there is no one, no doctor who would take you, no hospital who would take you.” I said “You need to help yourself.” (SF: Because they were Jewish?) FF: Yah. So my mother didn’t answer me. My papa comes down and says “What is it, what is it?” My mother says “The Goye are here.” My father went right back up in his room. I said “Papa, I know you say that I am half a goy for doing it. What’s going to be if you are sick? If the lieber Gott (dear God) sees this, why do you do this kind of thing? Why do you sit here? It’s the first time in my life I did it, but somebody has to help you people.” He said “I don’t know who brought you up, I don’t know. The big ones would have never done it.” He always said that. I said “Well I did it and I do it. I’m glad I did it.” Then they came. Then the Oberdorfers came and the Gallingers came. They all came to see what the goye did. And every Saturday they came marching in. They knew I’m gonna do it anyhow. But I put food in the stove to heat up. My parents wouldn’t eat it. That they wouldn’t do. (SF: Because you had cooked it on Shabbat?) FF: Yah. I heated it up. SF: When did they normally eat on Shabbos? FF: After Shabbos was out. We usually ate the main meal lunchtime but on Shabbos we didn’t. We ate the main meal after Shabbos. That’s what I did. I ate.
SF: The maids left at that point?
FF: They had to leave. Long before. (SF: Nobody would let them work there.) No. They made it terrible for them.
SF: When did it get really bad?
FF: It got bad already before I left. When I left it was already bad. But they left us alone. Somehow they were afraid of me or they liked me. They liked me. The town really liked me. Whenever I came home they brought me flowers and everything. They always said when I come sunshine comes. “Oh, Flora is home. The sun is shining.” They always said that. In fact, once made a joke. It was so snowy, they said “Send Flora out, the snow is gonna melt.” I was always very happy. I had no reason not to be. The only trouble what I had was with my hair. They didn’t like red hair. I got over that very fast, because it was such a beautiful hair. It was so, so full of luckin(?) they used to say. When I had it open, when I played...I had braids and when you opened the braids it was just like gold flowing. It was very red. At times it was redder. They told me in the summer that if you go in the sun, the sun is bleaching it so I walked around in the sun like crazy. I wanted bleached hair.
SF: Tell me about where your mother looked up and said “there won’t be anything but trouble from there.” Was it Berchesgarten?
FF: No. That was our mountain (Note: the Hesselberg). Not Berchesgarten. Is near Munich. From our bedroom, the view from my parents bedroom was so beautiful. All the mountains were there. It was just beautiful. Some people came... we had this doctor and he used to come and he used to say “Please let me paint from this window.” And they did. I used to say “Oh, momma, it looks so beautiful” but you get so used to it. She says “This is going to bring nothing but tzoris (trouble)” and it did bring tzoris. They put a youth castle up there and that’s where they came every few weeks, der Streicher and the Goering and the thing. They came with the white coats and with the big glasses, those dark glasses. We used to wear them for skiing. You know, the blinders. They came and when they came the bells were ringing. The heart cruze (Swastika?) went up, the flags went up. It was just terrible. My mother used to say “Didn’t I tell you it’s a curse.” It was a curse.
TAPE 3, SIDE 1. 7/23/86 Steven Frank, Scott Frank
SF: What towns were near Wittelshofen?
FF: Wassertrüdigen and Dinkelsbühl. Wassertrüdigen was east and Dinkelsbühl was west. They both had train connections but we did not. We had to get a bus from Wassertrüdigen to Wittelshofen or from Wittelshofen to Dinkelsbühl. Ours was like sandwiched in. A regular bus like we have here.
SF: What towns were near Buttenwiesen?
FF: Not towns. I don’t know the towns. I just know the nearest city was Augsburg and Donauwörth.
SF: What mountains were near you. FF: Near us was the Hesselberg. On top of this Hesselberg, it was the most beautiful mountain. We could see it from our bedroom window. My mother used to say “That mountain is going to bring us only schlamazel” which means bad luck and it came to pass. Hitler built a youth hostel there and that’s where they trained all those young Hitlers, Hitler guys, and that’s where Goering and Goebbels and they all came there in order to teach them and tell them whatever they’re supposed to do and whatever they should kill and not kill.
SF: What other landmarks were there?
FF: I don’t really know any other landmarks except where we lived. We lived, our house was in the town and our street was called the Schloss. That means like a castle because that’s where there used to be a castle.
SF: Did my father every mention any landmarks near Buttenwiesen? FF: No.
SF: Where did the other families live in Wittelshofen?
FF: Through the town. There was our best friends they lived just two seconds away from us. Their name was Weinschenk. They had no children. We were just like with Aunt Mella and Uncle Leo, it was just like one family.
SF: You father was a cattle dealer. What were the occupations of the other Jews in town?
FF: They were mostly cattle dealers and one they had a material store. One he was a cattle dealer too but he couldn’t make out too well so he started with knit clothes. (SF: So he owned a shop?) No. He just went around selling it to the small towns. He put the backpack on and that’s how he went away. Weinschenk.
SF: What was the religion of most of the people in town? FF: Protestant.
SF: How big was the town. FF: about 700, 750 people.
SF: Were there other towns nearby that had big Jewish populations in them?
FF: No. The next was, as I said, Wassertrüdigen and next was Dinkelsbühl. They both had Jewish populations.
SF: How far back can you remember the family names and where they came from?
FF: As old as I am. (SF: So just your parents and grandparents who we’ve recorded already?) FF: Yah. (SF: One of the early Winters came from Wassertrüdigen?) FF: They all came from Wassertrüdigen. Only my father (moved to Wittelshofen.) . My father married my grandmother and married into the house and to the business. Not my father. My grandfather. SF: He grew up in Wassertrüdigen and moved to Wittelshofen to get married. That was Solomon?) FF: No that was Falk. Gretl’s father married and moved to Altdorf. That’s near the Black Forest. Herta’s grandfather stood in Wassertrüdigen.
SF: Where did your mother come from?
FF: My mother came from near Würzburg. From Bütthard. That’s where my mother-in-law came from too. SF: Both your mother and my father’s mother came from the same town, so they must have known each other? FF: Sure they knew each other. I told you that.
SF: What did the grandparents do for a living?
FF: My grandparents? In Bütthard? I don’t know. (SF: Your father’s family?) FF: They had leather, like you make shoes. They had a big business with that. They sold leather. SF: So Falk was in the leather business too? FF: Yah, yah.
SF: What educational background did your parents have and your grandparents have?
FF: I don’t know any about my grandparents. I only know that my father went to real schul Which is equivalent to a boys school, to a seminary. (Note: described on a later interview as a ‘business school.’) . SF: Did he apprentice at all? FF: No. He could even speak some English words.
SF: What languages did they speak at home? FF: We only knew German. That’s the only thing we spoke. SF: Not Hebrew or Yiddish? FF: No. We don’t know anything about Yiddish (and didn’t speak Hebrew.)
SF: At what age were your parents married?
FF: My father was, I think, 29 and my mother was 24. It wasn’t arranged but everyone had to know where you come from and they inquired. I don’t know how my parents really met. My mother’s brother-in-law was a teacher and he wrote to the Hebrew teacher in Wittelshofen and asked about the family. They said it’s a very good family and they are very well to do and the only bad part is that red hair is in the family so if you get children they might be red hairy. Because red hair wasn’t too much liked at that time. That’s what I have. That was the only bad part.
SF: Where were your grandparents buried? FF: In Schopfloch. That’s near Dinkelsbühl. SF: Why were they buried there? FF: Because that was the Jewish cemetery. There was no other Jewish cemetery around. SF: So everybody in the surrounding towns went there to be buried? FF: Yah, yah.
SF: Was there any major, serious illness in your family when you were growing up?
FF: Nobody was ever sick. Nobody. In fact I asked my mother, I must have been about 20, I asked “What does it feel to have a headache?” We were never sick. I don’t know. I didn’t know anybody who was every sick in my family. SF: Healthy living. FF: Yah. Good air.
SF: Your father was a Cohen, right? How about your mother?
FF: Nothing I think. (SF: A Yisrael?) I imagine so. They didn’t count. Cohen only counted.
SF: Who was the family member you thought the most colorful, the most interesting?
FF: My mother. My mother had a lot of common sense. My mother, it seemed to, had very good upbringing. She taught us things which other people never even heard of. Even at home, every few years we re-did our living room, we put new furniture in. She just had a flair for all that nice things. They used to say “Oh God, you must have a lot of money. Every time we come...” It’s not every time. Every 10 or 15 years. “Things look so different. They look so nice.” Because my mother had a thing for that.
SF: What kind of things did she teach you?
FF: Oh, I told you. She used to say “Wenn ich spar, spar ich on me selber” I want to save, I save on myself. And the manners. We were brought up on very good manners. I don’t know if I followed them but we were brought up with them. Oh God, when I tell you what I used to do. Just to aggravate them. My mother was witty and my mother was extremely charitable. She always told us that. She says “If you have an extra, not dollars, we had marks, an extra mark and someone needs what’s underneath the mark, you always have to keep your hand open and think of somebody else. Not just of yourself.” That’s the way we were brought up. All the poor people they came to us. My parents were away once and one of the poor guys came out of the bus and he asked the man “Where does the Winters live?” He forgot from the last time. So this guy said “The Winters aren’t home.” He says “I might as well turn around.” There was another, a Jewish schnorrer. A baker. I don’t know how he lost his... Whatever he did I don’t know. He used to sing very nice. He came to us every four weeks and we wined him and dined him and my mother had clothes made for him and everything. His name was Moses Mendel. And a while he didn’t come, he just didn’t come. My mother used to say “I’m so worried about Moses Mendel. I wonder what happened. He must be sick.” My father said “Write to the city” which was Erlangen, that was near Nürnberg. So my mother wrote there and they said that he is very sick and he is in the hospital. Then my mother said they should keep us posted and let us know what happened. He died. So my mother went...and that was really something to go there. My father went to the cattle market in Nürnberg and my mother met him and they went to the funeral. They were the only ones at the funeral because he never told us if he had anybody. Then in his will that all the money he has had to go to my mother. It was a hundred marks, and my parents turned around and bought him a tombstone. He used to sing so nice, I never forget that. He used to come up the hill and he used to....and we came running. We loved him like he belonged to the family. He always came. And my father was the head of the Jewish organization so we gave him money. We gave him money, I mean my parents must have given him money, and the community gave him money. I don’t know how he always go where he was, because he was such a jolly fella.
SF: Did the Jewish community have much money?
FF: There was a time where they did have money, Yah, but the young people moved away because there was no future for anybody. Them moved away and then just the old ones were there and the old ones had a hard time making ends meet. Especially at the time when the Nazis came. They wouldn’t deal with us and so you had to live on what you had.
SF: Who was your favorite uncle or aunt or cousin?
FF: I had only one uncle I liked. The others I didn’t know. See I came very late and they were already old. Most of them died. Then I had that one uncle which I liked. He died too. I didn’t have any uncles. You never heard of him. He was a teacher. He had two sons and a daughter and the two sons went in the War. I told you that in the Second World War (Note: must have been the First) and one was killed and one there was the end of the war and he went to the mailbox to mail a letter to his parents to tell them when he comes and the mailbox exploded and killed him too. Then the mother... (SF: This must have been World War I). FF: World War I, yah. Then the mother, my aunt, her name was Laura. That was my mother’s favorite sister. She couldn’t eat anymore and she got sick and she got TB (tuberculosis) and then my uncle died, my aunt died, the two sons were killed and my aunt and then my uncle really died from a broken heart. (SDF: What was his name?) FF: Leo, Leo Hecht. They had one daughter and the daughter went to America. She was a spoiled brat. She went to America many, many years before this happened. Then she didn’t like it and she came back and she married a man twice her age and we never knew what happened to her. My mother used to say “I wonder what happened to that girl.” Nobody ever heard from her. She probably was killed too.
SF: Did my father mention any favorite uncles or aunts? . FF: No, no.
SF: Did you have any heroes when you were growing up? Anybody you read about...
FF: I liked everybody. I was a happy-go-lucky. History was not my... I liked music. I liked theater. Richard Strauss and those kind I went for.
SF: Did you join any youth groups or clubs?
FF: Oh yeah. I was the leader of Agudas Yisrael. It was very religious. It’s one of the religious... Agudas Yisrael. That’s one of the real religious organizations. In München. Oh, at home we had one girl who was very religious too and she started, on Saturday, to have those uh....You know you come there on lernen (to learn). I couldn’t take it. I couldn’t do it. I just couldn’t do it.
SF: Did you have any hobbies or collections? I collected dolls for a while. (SF: Who brought them to you?) My father. The Weinschenks. Everybody who came brought me dolls. I had them with those beautiful faces. You know something, I can’t even remember that far back what I did.
SF: How about sports?
FF: I loved sports. I loved skiing. I loved tennis. I loved anything in sports. My mother used to beg me to come with a dress on and a pair of gloves in my hand and be dressed like a lady, and don’t always come with skis and boots on. With pants and boots. I just couldn’t... Ida used to go home all dressed up and me I came like this all the time. I was never the dress up type.
SF: How about my father with sports? He played soccer?
FF: Daddy was ...yah, he played soccer and he was a what’s-you-call-it a physical...(SF: gymnastics?) Yah, he had those muscles. He was excellent. Excellent. (SF: Where did he learn gymnastics?) FF: At home. You learned and you taught it yourself and he taught it to others. That’s how he got out of Dachau. Because he was so good that to the people in town, to those young people, and the mayor said “If I can help anybody, I help him.” For some reason or other he got him out. SF: So he helped youth groups? Yah. He was very good in sports. If you remember, daddy had those muscles and all that. That’s why we really clicked so easily.
SF: Did you ever go to camp when you were young?
FF: No. We didn’t have to go to... we had the kids coming to us. From the orphanage in Furth, we had the boys coming. We had three boys every summer. Ida was in that orphanage. (SF: I thought Ida lived with her mother?) FF: She had to go away too to school. She lived in that orphanage for many years and she had those boys, they were with her, and we had the three boys coming every summer and we dressed them and we bought them shoes. They just lived with us. Every year we had them coming. The same boys. Till they grew up. When Ida went the first time to Israel and she wrote to them and met them and the first thing was that he wants to meet me. Then when I got there I left his address...I don’t know, I just never met him. I think I didn’t want to. It brings too much on. They always ask the same question: why? why? And I didn’t want to answer that. It was just too hard to answer those things.
SF: Did you have any jobs around the house?
FF: I should have but I didn’t. I did shopping for everybody. I rode with the bicycle like a lunatic. I did shopping for everybody in town. All the Jewish people. (SF: Where did you shop?) FF: Well, for meat I had to go to the next town. It’s nothing to write up, believe me, that town. It was full of Nazis. Uch, it was so full of Nazis. (SF: What town was it?) Gerult.... I forgot what the name of it. (Note: Gerolfingen.) I don’t remember any more. It was just full of Nazis. To Dinkelsbühl I went for other shopping. I had this bicycle and I had the two bags hanging on there and I shopped for them and brought them everything the way they wanted. I was the town shopper. (Chuckle.) And they never gave me anything. Sometimes they gave me two candies. But I always did shopping.
SF: How far was it to the towns?
FF: To Dinkelsbühl with the bicycle it took about an hour and a half. It was uphill all the time. I drove and it just didn’t bother me. Going there was hard because it went up the hill but coming home was all down the hills. That’s why I went, so I could go down the hills. Oh, I had the nicest bicycles.
SF: Where did you get things like vegetables and clothing?
FF: (Vegetables) In our garden. In Dinkelsbühl (got clothing.) Then we bought the material and we always had a dressmaker coming twice a year to the house. She stood with us for a week and she made the clothes for my sisters and myself and my mother. After she made the dress for me and I didn’t like it, I wouldn’t put it on. (SF: How about for your father?) They had it made in town by a tailor. In Wittelshofen there was a very good tailor. There were shops, there were grocery shops, there were material shops, one material shop, and there was the tailor, and there was the shoemaker, and there was the butcher but we couldn’t, you know..., (SF: It wasn’t kosher?) well the one next town was not kosher either but was schect with kosher und was watched over with, what do you call it, those guys who come, a shomer or whatever you call it.
SF: Where did most of the relatives live in Germany, Herta, Saler, Gretl?
FF: Gretl lived in the Black Forest, in Altdorf. Herta lived in Wassertrüdigen, that was a little city. That’s where our dentist was. I went there to the dentist. Aunt Saler, that was different. That was from my mother’s side. She lived in Künzelsau. That’s near Heilbronn. That’s near the Neckar. Not far from Heidelberg.
SF: Did you see them often?
FF: I wouldn’t call often. Once a year at least. See the transportation was very bad. (SF: Did you go to see them or did they come to see you?) Either way. They came and we went there. Never on holidays. See my parents couldn’t go away because they had all those animals which had to be taken care of. (SF: You had people to take care of them.) Yeah, but you still had to be there. The business had to go on. It wasn’t that you took vacation like here. You go away for four weeks or whatever. They were busy too. Aunt Saler, they were twelve sisters and brothers so they were busy too. Then I had an aunt, she lived to Frankfurt and she was not nice to my mother, that was my mother’s sister and she didn’t treat my mother nice after her parents died, and I have never met her. I never wanted to meet her. She wanted to send me money to come to visit her and I told her I wouldn’t come. So I never knew what she looked like. But when she died, she left me $1000. A thousand marks.
SF: Were there other relatives that I skipped who you saw? Ones who stayed behind.
FF: Most of my family stayed behind. Tell you the truth I can’t think that much. I can’t...
SF: What were your parents ideas on charity?
FF: On charity? There were a Jewish family in our town and they had two boys and two girls. The oldest son was as old as my oldest sister and then the second son we didn’t have anyone in between. The daughter was as old as Ruth’s mother and the younger one was as old as I am. As I was. They had also,....they were cattle dealers. But they lived it up. Whatever they made they spent so they always got bankrupt. Every other year they got bankrupt. Then their relatives came, my father came, and they got the money together and took them out of the red. So one year that her relatives, the woman’s relatives, said “I have enough now.” She says “You’re grown up people and if you can’t live like everybody else and hold on to what you have, forget about it.” So the winter came and they were really broke and they had no coals and no nothing. We had two maids and the man working for us. One evening my parents they went and they said they go away. I want to come along and they said no we don’t want anyone. They went down in the stables and they took those heavy coals, there were briquets if you know what that means, black coals, and they filled up. I never forget because I watched them, a big basket with coals, and they carried it out to them and they put it in front of the door, and then they took the basket home and filled it up with wood and they brought it there, so nobody should know that they did it, so none of the help should say we did it, you know. That’s (what) they did it. They gave money to people and my mother gave constantly. There was a house in town where poor people lived. I had to bring fruit there and food there all the time. My mother fixed it so beautiful like, never forget, we had those high baskets and she filled it with the plums. They were beautiful blue plums with the blue on it and then she stuck leaves in there. I used to say “Why do you do that” so she said “People shouldn’t think they just get it because they poor. They should see that they get like everybody else, with a little beauty behind it.” You know, they looked nice with green leaves in between the blue. When I brought em there, she just opened the thing and poured them in, green or blue or whatever.
Then my father belonged in the town, he belonged in the town to all those...the school thing and to all that, and then I came home once and I said I fell up the stairs in that poorhouse and he made sure that someone went there and fixed the steps. He said “Those people, those people have to....” They were really poor, they have God know how many kids from all kinds of men, you know, just like here. Then my father arranged that they have the steps fixed. The town paid for that but he was the only one who saw it and I told him.
My parents did a lot of good. My mother went to poor people, to sick people. It’s really.... That’s where we learned to do the things we did, you can’t just take it out of nowhere. You have to be shown somewhere.
SF: What were the typical foods you had at home?
FF: All the vegetables. I mean not (?) we eat. Carrots, peas, cole slaw, potatoes...potatoes we got from the farmers. (SF: What dishes did you make?) We had chicken. Chickens was a holiday meal. Chicken in Germany was very expensive. Then we had a lot of geese. In the winter we slaughtered about maybe 25 geese and that was all preserved and you wouldn’t believe how that was preserved. In the goose fat. We had big stands like this with goose fat and that’s where the geese was in there, the pieces of the geese, and then you took it out, out of the fat, and you wiped it off and you had fresh goose. We killed ten and another six and another fix and this.... Then had chicken. Then the butcher came every year and slaughtered an animal for us. (SF: A cow?) . Yah. A young cow. A calf. Then we gave to the other Jewish people too.
SF: What did you have normally for breakfast.
FF: Cacao, a piece of cake. Yeast cake.
FF: Lunch we had the main meal. We had meat and we had potato salad and meat with some sauces, and vegetable and salads. Dessert you only had on Shabbos, Friday night and Shabbos. That was the difference between every day and Yontif. Then we had soup all the time and we had a lot of potatoes. My mother was a fantastic baker. We had big cans like this with cookies all the time. Cakes. Then we had fruit. Oh, did we have fruit. Did we have trees. We had pears this size, apples and then we took them down like you have, to preserve them. Then in our cellar we had those big closets and pulled out a thing like a drawer, and that’s where we had the apples in and the pears. (SF: How did you keep them from spoiling?) I don’t know how but they were in those wooden things and they never spoiled. I mean you had to go down and go through it quite often in order to see but they lasted the whole winter. We never bought an apple. We never bought fruit. Plums my mother preserved. We had glasses and glasses of all the fruit.
SF: What did you do for dinner if lunch was the main meal?
FF: Evening you mean? Oh, you had potatoes and herring or scrambled egg and uh...you had a lot of fish. Fish was very cheap and easy to get. You had a lot of herring. You made a lot of stuff out of herring. Lox. (SF: Although you were inland, fish was easy to get?) Yah, yah. Like Uncle Leo said, they never had fish. (Note: Leo Kalberman lived in Mannheim but grew up elsewhere.) Fresh fish we had, carp and things like this. We had them very easily. We bought them but they were very easy to get. We had water around where they got fish but I don’t know what kind of water. You know when you are young like this, and when I got older, then the trouble started so that was the least of your worries.
SF: How did the holidays differ from regular meals?
FF: Oh, you had noodle charlotte. You had matzoh balls. You had other soup. You had green kern soup. You had big pieces of meat. You had everything. Pot roast and all those kinds of things. Then we had pigeons. Then we had young lamb. Oh were they good. My mother never ate a piece of lamb but she knew how to make it. When we had the pigeons each one got a pigeon. They were like this and then they were stuffed and ohhhhh. When I was 16 then I got a whole one. Otherwise I just got a half one. I couldn’t wait until I got a whole one. Oh those pigeons they were good. Ohhhh. Then stuffed breast of veal. Veal wasn’t that expensive either. (SF: That was on the Jewish holidays?) Yah, or on Shabbos could be too. Shabbos was always treated like a holiday. Friday night and Shabbos.
SF: What were your favorite foods?
FF: Meat. Meat and chocolate. My mother told me to marry either a butcher or a chocolate manufacturer. That’s the only thing that keeps me (will keep you) going she used to say. SDF: Chocolate all the way!
SF: What was the town synagogue like in size, shape, location?
FF: It was very big. It was big. I think I even have a picture of it. It was made for years, I don’t know for how many hundred of years before when they needed it, and then it was empty. SF: Was it wooden? FF: No. It was stone. It had windows that were like this (SF: Arched.) And it only had in front there at the bimah they had you know the lions and that was in stained glass. (SF: So the Bimah was up front, it wasn’t in the middle?) No it was up front. The men’s seats were on the bottom and the ladies seats were upstairs. It was like wood around like this. It was like a design in it. You could look down and see the people (SF: and the people could look up and see you.) Yeah. They wouldn’t dare do that but they could. SF: Do you know when the synagogue was built? FF: No. No idea. SF: Did it have any art work in it? FF: No, I don’t think so. It didn’t look like... There was a synagogue in a small town about maybe an hour and a half away. That was, they said, at that time that it was the oldest synagogue, I have pictures of it, in Germany. That was called Bechoven. It was made out of wood and everything was written on the wood. Prayers and everything. It was just beautiful. (SF: Was there anything written inside your schul?) No, no.
SF: What was the family role in the schul? Was your father president of the schul?
FF: Yah, forever. Forever.
SF: Do you remember the rabbi?
FF: We didn’t have one. I told you the rabbi we had, who was gay, who came from Ansbach. The rabbi came every year, from Ansbach, during the year. He had to check us in Hebrew. You know, ask questions and the like, tests. He was not a married man and he was a very good looking man. His name was Dr. Brader. Whenever he came, I was six years old when my sister got married, I run out and run to my sister. I wouldn’t stay in the same house with him. My mother said... So he said to my mother....yah he stood in our house. He was such a wonderful speaker that when he came and spoke in the temple the minister came, the teachers came, everybody came to listen to him. He had a voice, he was just a great man. That’s what they thought. Whenever he came I run out. He used to stand like this and I run under the thing and run out so he said to my mother “What’s wrong? Whenever I come, that little one runs out. Doesn’t she like me.” My mother said “I never asked her really” so my mother said to me before he came “If you stay home, why do you run out?” I said “I don’t like him. I don’t want him to touch me.” My mother said to me “If you stay home, I buy you anything you want. I buy you a new bicycle, I buy you...” “I don’t want it. I don’t want to stay in the house.” I run to my sister like crazy. She knew. She says “Oh, Dr. Brader came?” That was it. When he came and he made a speech and he came to eat, I’m sure I sat like this so when he gets up he wouldn’t touch me. I don’t know. I was six years old. So then my parents looked at him and everybody. They just thought he was the greatest. One day my father came home from the cattle market. Usually I run down and I greeted him and he opened his little satchel and he gave me chocolate and he always bought me chocolate with coconut. I liked that the best and he gave it to me and I hugged him and I said “Papa, don’t you feel good?” He says “Yah.” I said “Don’t you like me?” “Oh yah, I like you. I have to speak to momma.” So he came up and he took my mother and he talked to her and they all got red in the face and they went in the room. I stood there and I listened on the door and I heard them talk about Dr. Brader, Dr. Brader. Then when my mother came out I was gone already, and I said “What’s wrong with Dr. Brader?” My mother said “You wouldn’t understand.” Well, Dr. Brader was caught with a soldier and they found out that both were gay. The soldier was arrested and he (Dr. Brader) fled. They thought he fled to Switzerland. I grew up....it was just a terrible shame. It was over all the papers and he was such a prominent man and everybody looked up to him. The little city of Gunzenhausen, of Ansbach where he was, they were heartbroken. They couldn’t believe to them. In years later it was forgotten. We got a new rabbi and it was forgotten. I was with people in Switzerland, we went skiing, and we were very religious and we only ate in...they had very few Jewish restaurants but they had vegetarian places. We got in those vegetarian places. We sat down, I never forget it was a big round table like this, and I look up and I said “My God, there is Dr. Brader.” He turned like this and run out. I wanted to run after him. I don’t know what I wanted to run (laughing) and they held me back and this friend said to me, he says “How dumb can you be? He heard your name, he heard his name and he run and you want to run after him. What do you want?” I sat there. I just couldn’t believe. It was the same man. The same tall, heavy man. He looked the same. And I wanted to run after him. That was our rabbi.
He was replaced by a rabbi, Dr. Munk. That’s Tanya’s uncle (Note: Tanya SF believes is the wife of Jack Kantal, son of Hella and Sol Kantal.) (SF: Who officiated at services?) We had a teacher. Lehrer Sommer. His name was Sommer. He taught us every day. We had to go direct from public school to Hebrew school. From, I don’t know anymore. I couldn’t tell you anymore. Eight till one or twelve, I don’t know. Then we went direct from there to Hebrew school. (SF: How long were you in Hebrew school?) Two, three hours every day. (He taught us) the reading, the history, everything. He was a very good teacher but he died. He was a nasty man too.
SF: Did your father go to schul every day?
FF: They went every day. As long as they had minyan they went every day. My mother didn’t go. My mother went Shabbos. (My father went every day) as long as they had minyan. I was away already. I couldn’t tell you. I was away already and they didn’t have minyan anymore and came the holidays they we got either the boys from somewhere else or whoever came and we hired and paid....(SF: But they wouldn’t have a service without a minyan?) No. No. That was very hard for the people.
SF: How far was the schul from your house?
FF: No far. Ten minutes. You just walked out the town and up the hills.
SF: Sigbert had a Bar Mitzvah? FF: Yeah. SF: Do you remember it? Did relatives come from all over. FF: No, just from the small community the family came. They brought the tie as a present, and the pen as a present. (SF: Herta and Saler wouldn’t come?) FF: No, no. They weren’t invited. They had a lot of kids of their own and they didn’t.... It wasn’t like that. It was like years ago here. The elderly people here they said they never heard of such big things. When you speak to elderly Jewish people they say “We didn’t have that. We went to temple and came home and that was it.” Like Richie, Ruth’s (Note: FF’s niece) first husband, he had his bar mitzvah on Thursday. They went to the temple and went home and that was the bar mitzvah. They didn’t have it like this now. It was strange to me too when I came over. I remember that boy in our town who had bar mitzvah and I went down I brought him a tie. I still know the color of the tie. A striped tie. That was the present. Then you got a piece of cake and a cup of coffee. No, there wasn’t a big thing done.
SF: What did your parents give Sigbert? FF: Gold. Gold pieces. That I remember. A lot of gold pieces. How many I don’t know. Ginny (Note: wife of SF) got a gold piece? Remember (Note: Ginny has a gold piece that was sent to SF by a German friend of FF, for SF’s bar mitzvah.)
SF: Do you remember your sister’s weddings?
FF: Yah. When my older sister got married I was 6 years old. I had to stand up there and make a speech. I got two pigeons, two paper mache pigeons and I had to say a poem how those pigeons love each other and this and I couldn’t stand it but I had to do it. That was in a hotel. That was a beautiful wedding. In Gunzenhausen. That was the only Jewish hotel in the whole neighborhood. Strauss in Gunzenhausen. I remember that. That’s where we went and we stood overnight and it was a big thing. (SF: A lot of people came?) Yah. I don’t know how people came from out of town but there were a lot of people there. When Ruth’s mother got married, she said she wanted to be married at home so she got married at home. Then we had somebody who cooked. We had ducks that time, I remember that too. That was a nice wedding too. I used to say then already “Momma, that’s not going to happen to me.” “I don’t have this kind of business” I said. “Not with all those people. That’s not for me.”
SF: When Ruth’s mother got married where did people stay?
FF: There’s a hotel, there were two hotels in our town. They weren’t called hotels. They were called gasthof. They gave beer and dinners and they had a lot of rooms upstairs. That’s where they were. We had a big house. I remember Ruth’s parents they went away the same night. Where they went on their honeymoon I don’t know. I don’t know where my other sister went either. Look I was so young I didn’t know those kind of things. Never asked.
SF: Did any of your relatives get into the reform movement? No. Uh, yah. Not in...there was no movement. They just kept less and less and less. Where Saler came from they weren’t that religious at all. I mean they kept the holidays and this but I don’t think they were that religious.
SF: How about my father’s family.
FF: They were not that religious either. They also kept the holidays...
SIDE 2
SF: Was there a newspaper in town?
FF: Oh yeah. We had the Frankfurter Zeitung (Frankfurt Newspaper) and the Wörnitz Boden, that was the water which went through our town was the Wörnitz. (SF: Was that a stream or river?) FF: It wasn’t a real river, it was sometimes in the winter from snow when it run over, boy it had half of the town in trouble. It never hit us because we were up the hill. (It was) pretty wide, pretty wide. There was a bridge over it and the other side was the other side of the tracks. I never even came...very seldom came there.
SF: There was a Jewish paper too?
FF: No. Oh, yah. There was the Familien Platt, Family Paper, that came from Frankfurt. That came every week. Every Friday. When the town was prosperous, when the Jewish people were prosperous, my father had the Frankfurter Zeitung, that almost like the Wall Street Journal, and we had the Wörnitz Boden, and we had sometimes the Nürnberger Zeitung.
SF: Was your father a Hebrew Scholar? Did he study Talmud?
FF: No. He knew but he didn’t study. Nobody in the town studied.
SF: How about your grandparents?
FF: I don’t think so but I didn’t know them. I only know my grandmother which I didn’t like.
SF: What were your parents’ likes and dislikes?
FF: I don’t know. My father was a businessman through and through. My father couldn’t tie his tie. My father didn’t know where his handkerchiefs were. My father was everything handed (to him). When my father came home we stood on the door and my mother wiped his head, he had no hair like Uncle Leo, and I put the cap on. Then he had to take his jacket off and my mother hanged it up. My father was a businessman through and through but otherwise he didn’t know a thing. Like my mother used to say “As much as I love papa, but I hope if the time comes that papa dies before me.” I used to say “How could you say that. I thought you love...” She said “Yes, because I love him so much. Nobody would take care of him the way I do.” That’s the truth. He was spoiled.
SF: Did he dislike anything in particular? FF: He never said.
SF: How about your mother?
FF: No. My mother didn’t like gossip and my mother didn’t like when people complaining about others. She used to say “Stay away. Why aggravate each other.” She was always there to have peace.
SF: What was your parents greatest source of pride?
FF: The children, and the grandchildren. And me, I must say me. My father used to say “I wouldn’t give you away for a million dollars” and my mother used to say “Who do you think would want her?” But he used to give me anything and everything. When he came home sometimes and business was bad he used to say, he always said “Sit over there.” He just looked at me and that made him happy. That’s the spoiling he did. See he could never see any wrong.
SF: Was there anything they were ashamed of?
FF: No. We never did anything to...ashamed of.
SF: Was there a schul in Buttenwiesen?
FF: Yah. You met the woman in Israel who her father was daddy’s teacher. Sun. There was a schul there. There were more Jewish people than by us.
SF: Was the family, like your father or grandfather or your mother’s parents, do any military service?
FF: My father was in the First World War four years. And Bianca’s father and Ruth’s father. Ruth’s father was in Russia. Bianca’s father was in Macedonia wherever that is. My father was in Grafenwere (?) and then he was in France, in Lille or something. (SF: Did he ever talk about it?) . He used to say how some people stole the people blind. He never...in fact when they came home, my mother used to tell that. I didn’t know. When they came home they could keep the uniform, the long coats and the long things and my father said “Give it away. I don’t want to see it anymore.” But those people who I was telling you before, who never had anything, who were always bankrupt, he brought home diamonds and he brought green velvet, I never forget, and he brought everything. He just robbed the people blind. You know, in France, the ones who because Germany because they went through, I don’t know really how that happened. My father said “No, I don’t want to get rich on other peoples trouble.” Never did.
SF: You grew most of your own vegetables and fruits. Did you have your own vineyards too?
FF: No. We had some but they were so small that they weren’t... (SF: Who did the cultivating?) FF: Our man.
SF: What clothes did you normally wear? A dirndl?
FF: Yah, I wore a dirndl. I wore dirndls. I was very thin so not everything fit me. The dirndls you could tie up here, the vests and this. I had a lot of dirndls and they were beautiful. Then for Shabbos I had a regular dress. A silk dress or anything like that.
SF: How about my father? Did they were lederhosen or regular pants?
FF: No. Regular pants. They wore regular pants.
SF: Who wore lederhosen?
FF: Sigbert, my sister’s... I bought him the lederhosen for the summer. The kids when they were young they wore lederhosen. (SF: Adults didn’t wear lederhosen?) FF: In Munich they did but not where we were. Because that’s where they all wore them all the time. (SF: That was the style?) FF: Yah. I mean you didn’t go to work with those. Like you wear them now, when you come home from work you change. Or they were out in the fields they with lederhosen, things like that.
SF: Can you draw a diagram of your house?
FF: Our house was outside like this. Very heavy. Stone. For years, you know, the Nazis broke the windows. They didn’t let put any of the glass. There was no one there who would put glass in so we had to put paper, from a box-cardboard in. On the outside of the house it was so neglected. My mother used to say “I don’t want to go out.” It was so neglected. Because it needed to go over because it was up on the hill and the wind (Note: said winnnnd with inflection), you know. Nobody could do anything so half of the wall was...it was a terrible thing, it was just an awful thing to see.
FF:.... because they got old and couldn’t climb stairs. So that was my grandmother’s room. It was a small room off the living room, to the left. When my grandmother died, then we had a desk in there and a sewing machine in there. It made it very comfortable. It wasn’t that small but it was a nice room. Then you came out from the living room and then you went...that was the hall, then you went here and there was the kitchen. The kitchen was big. (SF: Across the hall from the living room?) FF: No. It was this way, toward the front. This was the kitchen and the kitchen had two buffets, one for milchdich and one for fleishdich. There was a stove and the stove was beautiful. It had a what-do-you-call-that? The top was shiny like a.. . It was always polished. There was a big kitchen table in there and from the kitchen you went into what we called the schpice. That was...that came up from the cellar, the coldness came up from the cellar and there was all out of stone. That’s where...it was cold like ice in there too. The coldness came out from the cellar somehow or another. It was built on top of the cellar. Then in the corner my mother had a big closet like with screen and that’s where we had our food in there. You didn’t have a frigidaire or even ice, we didn’t have that. That were the food in there. Then you went back there from the hall and there you went down the cellar. Back here was a big room where we had our working clothes. The men had their shoes there. You know, you came up from the thing. The shoes and we had the big thing where we all had the shoes, the working shoes, and the girls had the closet there. They had their clothes there. What was in the closet. I don’t know. My father’s working clothes. Then there was the bedroom, one bedroom. No then there was the bathroom and there was the bedroom. The bedroom was first for my sisters because it was big and they got married so I got it. It was a nice sized bedroom. It had two beds in there and they had a thing in there to wash your hands and all that. It was nice set. Then you went upstairs. There was my parent’s bedroom. Then there was another bedroom. Then there was a room where you had a big thing where you had your flour for the winter. Next to it was another way we had...I don’t even know what was in there. Then there was the “gutte zimmer” (good room) they called it. It was a beautiful room with red velvet furniture in there. Then there was a buffet that was just beautiful. Next to this was another room like a guest room and there was a big closet in there with mirrors and clothes, where we hung the clothes. Then upstairs were the maids rooms. (SF: You lived downstairs and the maids lived upstairs?) Yah, on the top floor.
SF: Where did the people who worked on the farm live?
FF: In their own houses. The man who worked for us, he lived above the stables because somebody had to live there in the winter. (SF: You had several people who worked for you?) . FF: At times.
Phone rings, interrupting discussion, which picks up at a different point.
SF: Camp?
FF: No her husband was...
SF: When did get a telephone?
FF: I don’t know. It was there all the time.
SF: Did you have any other appliances?
FF: Electric iron. We had the electric iron. See Uncle Leo could remember that they didn’t have electricity but I don’t. We had electricity all the time. Then we had some other irons which you put on the stove to get hot and to iron with. Then we had the carpet sweeper. That was really something to have a carpet sweeper. (SF: A vacuum?) FF: No a carpet sweeper. A regular carpet sweeper for the rugs. Well, we had electricity all through the house.
SF: What style of furniture did you have?
FF: Modern. We had beautiful furniture. Like this. We had in the living room we had a buffet and we had where you came in we had a stand where we had a big palm tree. Then we had a buffet and we had like a credenza on this side and then we had the sofa here and then we had leather chairs.
SF: The furniture was made by somebody?
FF: Yah, they were made locally. Lately they were locally but I don’t know where the buffet we had downstairs...
SF: Where did the family buy steins and silverware and those things?
FF: They had it all. We had it all the time. In the city I imagine. The steins you probably bought from the farmers when you saw them.
SF: What did you do for transportation?
FF: We had the bus who came through the town three times a day. Then we had the horses and the wagon. (Sf: The bus went between the little towns?) FF: Yah, from Dinkelsbühl...from Wassertrüdigen from the train to a small town, to our town and then to Dinkelsbühl. You could go on the train here and my father went to Nürnberg, to the markets so he took the bus or sometimes the man brought him there with the two horse...with the horse.
SF: Did you ever ride horseback.
FF: I didn’t go near a horse. They scared me to death. SF: How about your father? FF: He didn’t drive either. The man drove.
SF: Did you or your father take trips to other cities?
FF: My father went every week to Nürnberg, that was a trip, that was with the train about three and a half hours. (SF: That’s where the cattle market was?) FF: Yah, and Dinkelsbühl had a cattle market about once a month. And Nördlingen and Donauwörth. That’s how he knew daddy. Our daddy knew my father from Donauwörth, from the cattle market and from Nördlingen from the cattle market.
SF: What happened at these markets? Did people just make paper transactions?
FF: No. You transferred your animals there. We were the only ones in town who had a truck. My father had a truck made where you put the two horses on and you transported the animals (SF: You mean a wagon?) FF: Yeah, a wagon and you transferred the animals to the train and then it was transferred to the city. ( SF: My father did the same thing and that’s where they met?) FF: Your father didn’t. Your father bought em. He bought them to take them home and slaughter them.
SF: How did the family make the money originally to buy the schloss?
FF: (Laughing) You got a good question. I have no idea. This was my grandmother’s name. My grandmother was...
SF: Do you want to read the article now and translate it?
FF: It says here: When there were anymore Graffen and ... their title was taken away and they fought each other. Those herren. Whatever they were. When this was taken away, the Margrave, then they lost all their money and then they had to sell it. The family Schlossheimer and Monheimer. Schlossheimer was a cousin of my grandmother’s. My grandmother’s maiden name was Monheimer and they took this over, the schloss besitz (possessed) for 1800 gulden. That’s what they paid them for. 1800 gulden. It was 1856. Wittelshofen ,130 years ago, at night from the 13th to the 14th of May, 1856 the fire alarm came. The Margrave...and the schloss stood in flames. The fire came from all sides that they couldn’t save it. It was burning and they came from all the surrounding towns they came with fire equipment. Nine fire sprayers came and only two could come nearby on account of the high elevation. It was high up. They didn’t reach up. I always told you our house was up on the hill. The burning took from May 14, 12 in the afternoon till May 16. They had fights with each other. The Margrave and the other one. You know all those people, they lived on the peoples land and the people had to bring all the food in and support them and they lived in...they had to work for them for nothing, bring the food in for nothing, bring the wine and the beer, and they lived up to it and the other people starved and they got tired of it so they through some flames in and burned down the whole thing. They had a hard job that they (the Margrave?) got away from it. They would have killed them too. They were always killers you know. 1300. In the year 1300 came a man, 13 hundred eighty were that one thrown out and another one came in. He sold it to someone in Dinkelsbühl. (SF: So it was built in 1300 originally?) FF: Yah. Then came something else. In 1426 came another one who owned it. Ninety nine years. Ninety nine years they had the man in Ansbach who took care of, who owned it this place in Wittelshofen. Then in 1520 finally he could call it his own. Again it started like this that they took everything from the people and then... That’s also a town. 1525 they also came and sturmed against it. They shot against the thing. They just didn’t take this being fooled anymore. Then they built it up again. 35 rooms and three rooms for...where you have the big parties in it, what do you call it? Three ballrooms. They put that thing around the walls. Those water... (SF: A moat?) FF: But they was just small things. It was floating around but there were small things. On both sides were trees and there was water going through. That went around the houses. We had a lot of trouble with it. There were stones in there and we had to clean them out. He thought that’s going to help. He built 35 rooms with three of those ballrooms and the zehnten (Note: tithe). That’s the one who is still standing. That’s call zehn. They had to give a tenth of all their earnings and all their fruit they had to bring there. So those big shots could just live on that. They didn’t have to worry and work about it. They just took whatever they could get. And they got tired of it and they burned it down again. That place was burned down more often than anybody ever....
SF: But if they had 35 rooms on the same property you had your house on...
FF: We had four houses built there. Four houses.
SF: Article is from a May 13, 1986 FLZ.
FF: Let me tell you something. Our house was built on the ruins of the schloss but the surrounding, the grounds belonged all to the schloss and that’s where the other houses.... We didn’t own them. We only owned the grounds. We owned the trees and we owned the gardens. The houses were built from the Monheimer and the Schlossheimer and they must have sold the houses to those people but our house was ours and the one opposite us, was just almost like here, belonged to ...but this house on 1936 or 38 or 34, they don’t go that far, see.
SF: You said your father knew my father. What did he have to say about my father?
FF: Steven. Listen. Let me explain. Your questions some of them are so ignorant. I have never spoken to my father since I got married.
SF: But he wrote to you after that.
FF: Daddy said, our daddy said he knew my father when I explained to him what my father looked like. So he said he knows my father, he remembers my father. He had a little red hair here and he knows my father. My parents couldn’t write. They wrote through the red cross to me. What are you talking? So I’m going to ask him how he likes daddy when he never spoke to him? I don’t know. Hella says the same thing. I want to tell you something. When I was young....
SF: Was the family in any kind of politics?
FF: No.
SF: Did any of them talk about Israel?
FF: No. My father just said once a year “lashonah habah berushahlayim” (next year in Jerusalem) and I said “I don’t want to say it because I don’t want to go there. It’s good enough for me here and I don’t want to go to Jerusalem.” He used to say “That’s what written here and you read it.” I said “I don’t want to go, why should I read it?’
SF: Were there any Zionists in the area?
FF: No. He always said... He says....then he always said he would love to go to France to-what is it called? -the Forgesen(?) , that’s a mountain in France. He always said “Ooo, I would love to go to see that once in life.” He would have enjoyed that. Oh would he have enjoyed that.
FF: Scott don’t, God forbid, don’t drop it. Don’t play around with it.
SF: Did the family take trips together or go on vacations?
FF: They couldn’t take it together. My father came to Munich or my mother came to Munich. I told you about the animals. Always somebody....even it you had help you still had to be there to...
SF: Did you or your sisters ever go with them?
FF: They lived already in Munich. My sister lived in Munich. (SF: How about when you were younger?) Yeah, I went with my father and with my mother. They weren’t too keen on taking me because I wanted to do things and they were already old, don’t forget. My mother was 42 when I was born.
SF: What did the family do for relaxation during the year?
FF: Huh, huh. That’s a good question. We relaxed at home. We were glad to be home after a day’s work.
SF: Did you listen to music or read or...?
FF: Read. My father was a great reader. A great reader. We had a lot of books. Always had a lot. My mother always. . I got her from the school library a book. It was called Genevieve and she read that every year. We had all the papers and magazines. (SF: You had a Bechstein? .) I took piano lessons but I wasn’t good at it. I didn’t care. (SF: Did you have a record player?) FF: No, we didn’t have a record player. (SF: Did you go to concerts?) FF: Not in town. When I came to Munich. Yah, we had sometimes some theater groups coming to town. Steven, don’t forget, it was a small town. There weren’t such things as you ask. You had to go to work early in the morning. Those kinds of things, they are not real what you ask. This is not this time. Remember when we used to go to Toms River, when they had the chicken farm? They worked from mornings to night and went to bed at night. Right. This is the way it was at home too.
SF: What were your favorite subjects in school?
FF: Math. Reading. No, I didn’t like history. I hated history. Geography. I loved geography and I was very good at it.
SF: Did my father ever talk about school?
FF: He was the best in math. He enjoyed math. He loved math. And reading. He used to say he wasn’t good in writing, in writing letters, but his handwriting was 100 times better than mine ever, and when he sat down and wrote a letter he came right down to the point, he didn’t flower it up but he knew how to write a letter. Just like Uncle Leo. He always said he wasn’t good in writing. He wrote very well too.
SF: You went away at what age to go to school? FF: 12.
SF: Why did the send you away to school.
FF: Because that was the only way, you go away. Because that was the break of the public school. 12. SF: Did most people continue their education.
FF: No. They all went. They went to 16. It didn’t stop at 12 but that was the public... I don’t know how to explain it to you. The teacher always said that, to tell you the truth I to say, I was too smart for the school there and they should put me in a better school. He didn’t know what to do with me a times to ask questions, you know. Then my mother said she didn’t know what to do and then my relatives came from Nürnberg, they came during the war. They had no food so we gave them all the food, we had the chickens and we had the meat and we gave them.... Then they wanted to make good and they said “Why don’t you send her to us and we send her to school from hereon where she can learn better than at home.” So that’s where I went. Then I went to public school till 16, right? How long do you go to public school? 14? 16? Then I went right away from there to high school which we didn’t have home. We had good teaching but not that excellent.
SF: So you went to high school in Nürnberg? FF: Yah. See we didn’t just have one class together. We had classes together third and fourth and fifth grade. We had it in the morning. They had it in the afternoon. It was just one schoolhouse. In Wittelshofen. Nürnberg, that was much different. It was such an old building. Oh, was it old.
SF: Was it unusual to send the girl away to school? FF: Yah, very unusual.
SF: You said Ida went away also. FF: Well she had to go away to the orphanage.
SF: But her mother was alive. FF: Yah. I don’t want to tape that....
SF: Did you have any very good friends in school?
FF: Yeah, I had very good friends in school. In Nürnberg they were very Nazis then already. They used to sing some Jewish things against the Jews then already. At home yeah. They were good. I was very good with them. (SF: Who were your best friends?) Selma in England who died and Ida naturally and there were a lot of...we were just like one family, there were a lot of girls I was very friendly with. We didn’t even know any different. I mean I didn’t go to their house and they didn’t come to my house but we were very family. There was this girl, her name was Marga, who was at the post office who we supported. Her mother had TB and she came home with me every day to eat. When I expected my papers she says to me “We don’t give papers to Jews and I’m not giving it to you.” She wouldn’t give me my paper and I went in and I threw her against the wall.
SF: Were your friends mostly Jewish?
FF: No, there was just Ida and Selma and me and Josef, he went away to become a teacher and that was all of us young people. SF: Who was Josef? FF: Gallinger, the one who took me down like this and I thought I was pregnant. I told you.
SF: Did you ever have any private tutors? FF: No, I never needed any. I tutored others. I helped Ida. Don’t ever talk to Ida about school otherwise she’s going to hit the ceiling.
SF: Any special books you remember other than Genevieve?
FF: Genevieve. What I read. I read everything. Whatever came across I read. I don’t know any special books but I read any romance and anything. Whatever a kid reads. We had a very good school library.
SF: And you had good teachers too?
FF: One. He killed himself later on because he went after girls. He went after me too. He kept me in school and then he sat down with me. Because I didn’t empty that spit thing he kept me in school. Then he sat on the bench with me and we went all over me and I went home and told my father and then another girl the same thing. Then they called him and told him and he didn’t and just wanted to be good to us and then, years later, I was already in ...oh ya I was in München and he did the same thing and then they threw him out and he went to another town and did the same thing and then he killed himself. But he was a very good teacher.
SF: How about in Nürnberg, what did you study?
FF: Everything. But nothing specific. (SF: What about the professor who did this? –pointing to the pencil drawing/Mizrach). Oh, he was wonderful. He was wonderful. In Hebrew. Zeigler. He was a wonderful man. I tell you something Steven, you ask me something 50 years ago and if you want me to remember those things I have to make up a story. I cannot remember. If you asked me what he looked like I really don’t know anymore. I really don’t.
SF: What did your parents do during the inflation?
FF: I was 14 years, 13, 14 years old. I don’t know. My father built a new stable. He built a beautiful stable. A modern stable where you fed the cows...you know you used to have to go in between the cows to put the food in and then it went around. Just the heads faced you.
SF: Then you bought a piano too? FF: Yah, we bought a piano. I must have said that. I forgot in the meantime. As I tell you Steven...
SF: Tell the story about the lady whose chickens you got drunk.
FF: Oh, well. The lady I got the chickens drunk. The lady didn’t like me and she lived downstairs in a house and every time I passed by with my bicycle I rang the bell like crazy because I didn’t want to run anybody over, you know, so she didn’t like me for that because sometimes she must have slept. I woke her up with ringing the bell. Everybody knew I was coming because I rung like a lunatic. So whenever something was wrong in her place she blamed it on me even if I wasn’t there. She’s says “Flora did it. Flora did it.” Once I came to Hebrew school and he said to me “What did you do to Frau Pollock? “ I said “nothing.” He said “Yes you did” and he hit me. I said “What for?” He said the Frau Pollock said you did something. I didn’t say good morning or...she asked me...oh no, I never forget Frau Pollock, it was thundering and she says to me “Do you know the brocha over the thunder or the lightening?” I says “Yeah, but I forgot” and I should have remembered it. Frau Pollock said to the teacher “You don’t teach your children right. She didn’t even know the brocha over thing” so he hit me. Everything what was wrong she blamed it on me. So one day I felt very hurt because she said I did something and as bad as a devil as I was, I never lied. I told the truth even if I know I get punished.
So she made this up. I don’t know what she told my father I did something I didn’t do so I said to myself “This time I’m going to hit you where it hurts you most.” I just about had it. She was this size but she was a devil. So I had this apron on. And she loved her chickens. She always stood there and cluck, cluck, cluck, cluck and they stood in the middle and the clucks were all around her. I put this challah, this Berches, in whiskey and as a child, as dumb as you are, and I put the whiskey things in my pocket and my pocket got all sticky and full of crumbs and I went to the chickens and I just through it. I go cluck, cluck, cluck and all the cluck, cluck, clucks came and all the cluck, cluck, clucks they ate the thing and I stood there on the corner. I know the spot. I looked and they ate like crazy and I threw more. I went home and I was the happiest person. I said to myself “This time I got you. This time I got you.” It didn’t take an hour. She comes running in and she had such small feet. “Herr Winter, Herr Winter.” My father was for everybody. My mother used to call him the blitzachleiter. He was like whenever the lightening hit they knew where my father was. We had a veterinarian. We had him under thing (retainer). You never know what happens to the cows. So she said “You got to call the veterinarian. You got to call. Oh my chickens are dying. My chickens are sick. My chickens are dying. My children. My children.” My father said “What happened?” She says “I don’t know what happened. They were all right in the morning and I let them out and I come out and they are all laying there dead.” So my father said she should go home and he is going to call the veterinarian and he is going to come out and he is going to tell her what to do. He says “We get you chickens. Don’t worry about it.” “No” she says “We had those gray pearl chickens.” They were all gray. They looked like pearls, you know. My father said “We help you getting it. Don’t worry about it.” So she run home and she had a kerchief around. My father said “What could happen? What could happen?” I stood on the door and I said to my father “Papa, her chickens aren’t sick.” He said “What do you mean?” I said “They’re not sick. The chickens are drunk!” So my mother said “Her chickens are drunk? What are you saying? ” I said “You’re going to hit me.” (Background has Scott laughing.) I always said that. My father said “Tell the truth. I don’t hit you.” My father never hit me anyway. My mother did the hitting. I said “I tell you why. Because she is always saying things about me and she’s always lying about me and even the lehrer, the teacher, hit me because she lied about me. I’m sick and tired and I wanted to hurt her. So I made her chickens drunk” My father started laughing (continued laughing in background by Scott) and my mother said “Solomon that’s nothing to laugh. This is the undergang. She said this is the trouble with that kid. Whatever she does you laugh to it.” He said “What did you do?” and I told him what I did. My mother said “Where did you get the whiskey?” I said “Home, from here.” “How did you do it.” “In my pocket. My pocket was all fat and greasy from the liquor.” I said “You gonna hit me.” My father said “No, I don’t hit you but what am I going to tell her? Because if I tell her this, you really be mud (Note: Scott is continuing to laugh. and FF is feeding on his laughter.)” My father went out. To tell you the truth I don’t know what he told her but when he came out the chickens came back to life. I don’t think he ever told her what happened but he came home and he took me on his lap and he says “Would you promise me one thing? Would you promise me not to do those things. This time you got away good. The next time it’s not going to work that easy. Don’t do those bad things.” I said “She condemned me all the time. She blames me for everything.” Ida could do anything she wanted. She never was wrong and I was always wrong and I got tired of it. My father told her, he said to her “Enough is enough. This constant bothering and the constant hurting the kid and the constant telling her the things, I don’t want you to do it. If she does something wrong then we punish her, but you don’t leave her alone...” I tell you what happened then. She died a few years later. We were supposed to sit there and watch over night. See when the people died in small towns, you didn’t have a funeral parlor or anything. You put straw on the floor and that’s where the person stood overnight. The next day they got buried. Ida, Selma and me were supposed to watch a few hours at night, you know, you changed off. So I said to them “I don’t believe she’s dead” so Ida said “Yes she’s dead.” I said “Let me do something.” I took the ball and I always played ball and I was very good like a ...? ...I said “I’m going to throw the ball against the wall and if she doesn’t say anything then I will know she is dead.” I took the ball, I threw it against the wall, she didn’t say anything, I said “She’s dead. We have to sit. We have to watch. She’s dead.” Then I believed. We really had good times though.
SF: Anything else you can remember like that?
FF: No. Then came the hard times.
FLORA FRANK
ORAL HISTORY TRANSCRIPTION
RECORD ED 2/16/87
SF: You wrote to your parents. How often did they write back to you?
FF: Well, you could still write there. That was 38. When I told them. I told them what wonderful jobs I had. I didn’t tell them what work I did. They sent me people to visit me when they came over here. Gretl Weil used to send me all the people who sold things. Some of those German people who came here, they were a lot of doctors and lawyers and they had to start school again and they had no money so they sold canned stuff and stockings and everybody who she knew she sent to me. I bought all that stuff because I couldn’t say ‘no’ and then I gave it all to her. What was I going to do with canned stuff? I worked for people. I worked for some people they didn’t give me enough to eat.
SF: So then you had to spend your own money to eat?
FF: Yeah. I left. They had very terrible underwear. I couldn’t stand that. I had to wash it. They had such torn, dirty underwear and I got sick over it. I couldn’t... I had to sleep in the.... They had one child, they were teachers, and I had to wait till they were in bed and then I could sleep in the hall. The hall had no light, and no window. No nothing. They just put a cot up. They had like a paper closet. You know, one of those brown paper things. That’s where then hung my clothes in and I had nothing for my underwear and this I dropped in the bottom of the closet. I said I can’t. Then I had to do the wash and then one day she brought a lot of wash and I had to drip this all in the kitchen. I said to myself “This is funny. They don’t wear this kind of underwear. Flannel long nightshirts and this.” She brought her parents to me too to wash. So I said to her “No. I can’t. You’re too tricky for me.” I said “What do you think I am, a slave?” She says “You ought to be glad you have something to eat.” I said “I’m not that hungry that I have to make a slave for you.” I slammed the door and walked out. Oh they were so tricky, you have no idea.
Then I got another job as a cook. Then they never paid us in time. They had no money. They lived above their means. They lived on the East Side (Note: Of New York City). Then they claimed that a lot of stuff was stolen. Plates and linen and things. They wanted to get some money somehow. Then they came, the detectives came and they questioned us. There was a chamber maid and me and I couldn’t believe it. I said “Why do you ask us such questions? I never took a handkerchief or a piece of paper which didn’t belong to me.” They said “Well, it was stolen.” I said “ I don’t steal anything. I don’t need that kind of stuff. I have more stuff than I need.” So then I left too because I was hurt. Then I went to Proskauer.
No. Then I took a job with an old couple. It was opposite the Museum of, what was the museum, the one you look into the skies and the stars? The Planetarium. There was my room, was a small room that went off the kitchen. I couldn’t lock it at night so I put the chair on to keep the door closed. All of a sudden I woke up and I said to myself “I see this door moving” and that old fuzzy duddy comes marching in and wants to touch me all over. I hit him on the hand and got up 3 o’clock in the morning and packed my suitcase. When she got up I said “I’m leaving.” She says “Why are you leaving. I’m so satisfied and all this.” I said “I don’t want to hurt you. I can’t tell you the truth.” I said “Just let me leave.” I dragged my suitcases on 81st Street to the subway and went up to the Weils. Brought my stuff and she said “What happened?” I said “That old guy came and he wanted to fool around.” Oh, God, I tell you. You think he couldn’t hold a cup himself. Starts fooling around we me. So I left there too.
Then I went to Proskauer. I saw it advertised in the paper that they needed a kitchen maid for Lake Placid. So I went there. Gretl says to me “How do you expect to do this?” I said “I don’t know, I just got to do something. I got to make more money.” In the meantime was Ruth and Bianca (Note: FF’s nieces, the daughters of her two sisters, who escaped to England on the kindertransport) in England and I signed up that I send every month $20. With those teachers you didn’t make more than $40, how could you send $20. (SF: What do you mean those teachers? Oh, the ones you worked for? FF: Yah, $40 a month.) I went around that building a few times and then I went into the service entrance. That bothered me though. Then I went up and they called Mrs. Proskauer. She says “Can I help you?” I said “Yes, I saw your advertisement in the paper and I’d like the job.” So she looked at me and said “You want to be a kitchen maid? Do you realize what that consists of?” I said “No.” She says “You have to wash, you have to do all the dishes.” There were no dishwashers. “You have to wash all the towels and you have to do the chauffeur’s and the gardener’s bungalow and then we have an extra bungalow where my daughter and her family live for the summer. They come from Boston and you have to do the dining room and the bedroom there too. You don’t have to do anything for the children.” So I said “I’m willing to do it.” She said “You’re very thin and you’re very young. Do you think you can do it?” I said “I can do it. I have no other choice.” She says “Well, we try you out here. We have to come for a month here to the house. 57th Street. You have to see how to wait on the table. You have to help the chambermaid, you have to...” So I did everything good. I washed the dishes and I washed...she soaked it with Clorox and my fingers they were all red and hurting but I did it. I think I got $75 a month. You got tips and everything and I didn’t take the tips. I left them laying there till they said “You better take the tips. In (this) country they tip you so I run and got the tips. (SF: Who tipped you?) They had a lot of visitors. So I made about $1000 in the summer. So that’s what happened.
SF: You stopped working for them after the summer?
FF: No. I got...then they had a chambermaid who was a terrible Nazi. An Irish woman. She was such a Nazi. Oh, she was terrible. I fought with her. She used to say “What do you have to work for those rich Jews. You’re Jewish yourself.” I said “What is your husband? The chauffeur for Vanderbilt, and they are good Catholics and so are you.” I said “Answer me. You answer me and I answer you.” She hated the Proskauers. She just was terrible. She hated the Jews. She didn’t hate me she said, because I didn’t have anything either, but the rich ones she hated. Mrs. Proskauer heard that. There was a small bathroom near the kitchen where we always fought. She called me in once and she said to me “This can’t keep on anymore. She hurts you so.” I said “Yah, I answer her back.” So she said there is no necessity that you have to run away from and get the same thing here.” She said “She’s going to go.” She went in and she says “Mary. Here is your ticket. Leave tomorrow. I’ve had enough of you.” She wanted to say goodbye to me so I said “You must be crazy. You must be crazy. You want to say goodbye to me. The hell, I don’t care where you go. For my part you go to hell but don’t you put your hand out for me.” So I became the chambermaid. (SF: Which was easier?) Oh yeah, was much easier. Then you got a lot of tips.
SF: You were essentially responsible for making up all the beds?
FF: Yah. Then I ate all that Ex-lax. Didn’t I ever tell you. I wanted chocolate. I needed chocolate so bad. They didn’t have any chocolate. In every night table there was Ex-lax. It looked like chocolate. Tasted like chocolate. So everywhere I broke a piece off. In every night table. I had about six rooms and Jeanne had about six rooms. I said to her “Jeanne could you get me a little chocolate. She said “There’s no chocolate.” I said “Ex-lax.” She said “That’s not chocolate.” I said “Well I like it. I need some chocolate.” I said that I’m a chocoholic. So she got me chocolate and I got me chocolate and I just couldn’t leave the bathroom. I was supposed to serve on the table at night and I got such cramps and I just couldn’t work. Oh, it was terrible.
I went there three times to Lake Placid. Every time I went there I cried. I was so homesick. The chauffeur went after me. He threw me once over...not the chauffeur. No, he was nice. They had a Canadian gardener and he threw me once over his bed. He wanted to fall over me and I went back like this and he had glasses. He couldn’t see without glasses and the glasses went in the corner. He said “Get me my glasses!” I said “For my part you can lay there day and night. I wouldn’t get you your glasses.” Then I went to Mrs. Proskauer and told her what happened.
SF: How do you spell Proskauer? FF: P-r-o-s-k-a-u-e-r.
SF: When you were up at Lake Placid there was an accident when you hit your head on the rock?
FF: You mean on the swimming. Oh God, I nearly drowned. That’s why I can’t swim anymore. I have pictures of it. I took the daughter’s bathing suit because I didn’t have a nice one. I had a European one. I couldn’t afford to buy one here. I said “Ooh Francis had such a beautiful bathing suit” so the chauffeur was a very nice man. He had two married daughters. He says to me “Toots, go ahead. Put the bathing suit on. I take pictures.” So I went to put the bathing suit on and he says “Go up on that rock. It’s nicer when up there.” I went up on that rock and those rocks were kind of loose, for some reason or other. You know, the water hit against them all the time. I held like this and the rock loosened and the rock and me went into the water. They thought that I was joking. They told me I came up the third time and my eyes were all like this. Then the chauffeur who was dressed in his uniform, he went in with a big stick and got me out and threw me on the floor and I threw up water for hours and I was all night.
Then Jeanne slept with me because I threw up all night and I was like delirious. I was just worried about the bathing suit. If I would drowned and have Francis’s bathing suit on then they think I stole the bathing suit. So I wouldn’t go across. See we were on an island Camp Highwall was on an island. Whenever we had a day off I wouldn’t go because I wouldn’t go on the boat. I couldn’t smell water. I had to do above where the water was, where the boathouse was, there was this man’s room on top. You know, where the men came together and they had this, what you had (Note: Pool table) and all this and that was my place to clean, to keep in order. Not vacuum or anything, just to keep in order. It was above the water. It was a beautiful room with leather chairs and this. I couldn’t go so I made out with Jeanne who was a chambermaid. I said “Jeanne do me a favor.” No, Jeanne was the waitress. I was the chambermaid. I said “I do anything for you, but go down and do the boatroom. I can can’t go. I can’t smell it.” She says “I understand. I do it” and she did it.
SF: Did you ever hear from her afterwards?
FF: Oh yeah. She came very often with her husband and her children. She had a half a dozen children. On the end it got too much for me and then she gambled(?) . He name was Jeanne Gristman. She lived in New Jersey. So, oh God, I tell you that was terrible. Oh was it terrible.
SF: Then what did you do after the Proskauers?
FF: I got married. Daddy called me every day. When he said four o’clock, then he called me four o’clock. Mrs. Proskauer knew something happened so she called me in once and she said “Flora I hope you’re not going to leave us. I hope you’re not going to leave us.” I said “What do you mean?” She said “I understand you get calls every day and it looks like serious.” I said “Mrs. Proskauer, you have two daughters. Don’t you want them to be married? I’m sure my mother would want me the same thing to do.” So she says “Well if you leave, we wish you the best. We hate to see you go.” Then when I told her she says “Don’t go to your relatives. Take the room upstairs. Stay in the room.” They had a triple apartment. She says “Stay here until you get married. You go to your relatives, you never have peace for a minute. Stay here. The room is yours.” But I promised the Weils to go so I went.
SF: What did you do at the Weils?
FF: They went to Florida. A week before I got married. Two weeks before I got married. They thought that...then tante was there, Gretl’s mother was there you know. She was sick. She had cancer in the stomach. I came there and they left for Florida. In the morning the doorbell rang and I go on and the painter stands there. I said “What do you think you’re doing?” He says “I’m ordered to start painting today.” I said “You’re not painting here. I said I am here with my aunt and that’s a handful.” Oh, the Mrs. Weil extra gave me a tip.” I said “I don’t care what she gave you, you’re not going to paint while I’m here.” They thought they go to Florida and I do their house painting. When they come back they come in a clean house. (SF: They were wrong.) FF: You bet they were wrong. You have no idea what I went through. You have no idea. Yah, and then we got married.
SF: Once while we were on vacation at Lake Placid you saw Mrs. Proskauer again.
FF: Yeah but she didn’t...she was blind then. Yah, she didn’t know anybody anymore. I think they had to take her to a home.
SF: I thought she invited you to the island. FF: No. She didn’t. I said “Ooo, this is Mrs. Proskauer” but they told me later on, somebody who knew them, that she was blind. SF: What was the name of the island. FF: Camp Highwall. Well the camp was the name Camp Highwall but the island had no specific name. Kate Smith was there too on that island.
SF: So they owned a house there, not the whole island. FF: No, they owned a house and a boathouse, and he had his horses in the city.
SF: He was a judge?
FF: Yeah. He was a crooked judge. That’s what they said. I don’t know how he made it (the money). She had it. Naumberg, you know Naumberg. Naumberg was her maiden name. They have those concerts in Central Park, the Naumberg Concerts. She came from... he wanted to become a rabbi. He came from Mobile, Alabama and he wanted to become a rabbi. They weren’t happily married.
SF: How long did you write before the letters got answered.
FF: I could write because I got a, the last letter I got, when you were born (1942) because my father said to me once “If we can’t write to you anymore direct, we write through the Red Cross.” See he knew everything. He just didn’t want to know. So one day I was nursing you and Mr. Levy was our mailman. He called up “Mrs. Frank, you got a European letter.” I went down and he handed me this Red Cross letter and I fainted. Hit my neck against the steps. Do you remember on Parkside Avenue (Note: apartment was at 260 Parkside Avenue, Brooklyn, NY) upstairs where we lived. (SF: on the third floor?) FF: Second floor. I hit my neck like this and I had no more blood. . no more milk. You screamed day and night and I couldn’t figure out what happened. When I went to Dr. Wesley he says “You have no more milk. What happened?” I told him and he says “That’s what happened. You were scared. The child is hungry.”
SF: So you wrote to each other for close to four years.
FF: Yah.
SF: From ‘38 to ‘42. It was only at the very end that the letters were censored?
FF: They were censored for a long time. Even the letters they wrote. They were sometimes... I have the letters. I have a lot of letters. Some of them were crossed out and some of them were over taped. Taped over. But that letter I got from the Red Cross. That was ‘42 when you were born. Well my mother couldn’t get over it when I told her I’m gonna marry. You know my mother and daddy’s mother came from the same town. Years ago when I was in Munich and my mother came to visit us, so I said “Momma, don’t you have anybody from home who you could visit?” She said “Well there is an elderly couple and they very old fashioned,” meaning the Hamburgers. Remember the Hamburgers? Then there is another people she says, they live near Augsburg.” I said “You’re here in Munich. Why can’t you visit them?” She said “They have a lot of children. They come from the other side of the tracks.” I said “What’s their name?” so she says “Frank.” I said “Are they Jewish?” because we had Frank home who were not Jewish. She said “Yah, they’re Jewish. In fact the mother was a Frank when she was single and she married a Frank.” So she...
SF: Did your family use code words or secrets? FF: No. (SF: Just wrote regular and they were censored.) FF: Yah.
SF: Did you ever write to your sisters?
FF: Sure I wrote to my sisters. Well my parents lived with Ruth’s parents on the end. They took them. See I don’t even know those things. They took my parents from home to a prison, and Herta’s parents too. She Paula knows more. Paula came later to England, but you can’t ask her(SF: Paula Seligman? . Note: Paula Seligman was Herta’s sister.) She lived in Munich. she lived above my sister. My sister got them an apartment. But you can’t ask her anything. She can’t talk about it.
SF: Did my father ever write home?
FF: Sure he wrote home. We all wrote home. I got letters from his family. Sure we always wrote. Every week we wrote. His parents they were in a concentration camp, Bialek (Note: Belzec? Bergen-Belgsen?) something near this Poland and there some distant, distant, distant relative of theirs, their name was Wolf and they lived in Switzerland. We used to send money to Switzerland. I said once, I said “Daddy, believe me I would like to go out and make money so you could send to your parents but they never gonna get it. This is gonna stay in Switzerland with that Wolf as sure as I sit here.” That’s what happened. They never got it. They made money those. There were plenty of people who made money on those.
SF: They were doing what they had to, to survive.
FF: Well, in Switzerland. You couldn’t be in Switzerland unless you had money there ahead of time. That Wolf, I knew him from Stuttgart. I never liked him.
SF: Do yoere any of the sons sent to America? FF: Yah. Simon who was in Detroit, Irving who you knew, Aunt Maler, and Aunt Elsie. Those were the five living children of Aunt Regina.
SDF: Which one was your mother of the 12?
FF: She was the youngest. Oh, Tante Lorsian (sp?) that was too. Tante Lorien (sp?) She was one of the sisters too.
SF: Where do Ruth and Marian come from?
FF: From Uncle, I think his name was Uncle Sy. I don’t know, Seymour or whatever it would be. They (are) related like Aunt Salerave the dates and the numbers. I got some answer back. Yah. I got some answer back. They told me when my mother died. May 18. And they told me when my father died. Somehow or another they found that out.
SF: They didn’t have any records of your sisters?
FF: No. No.
SF: Is it possible they survived.
FF: No. No.
SF: You never checked any further?
FF: I did. With certain Jewish organizations. I think its enough now.
SF: Ruth came on Thanksgiving. How did you keep track of Ruth and Bianca and how did they get out of Germany?
FF: They sent me...when the kids came to England. Well Bianca was first in England. Then she asked for Ruth. When they came to England they gave some address of relatives in America.
SF: Wasn’t Ruth on the last children’s boat to leave?
FF: I don’t know. Could be. Could not be. I’ve forgotten. (Note: was not.)
SF: That was in what year? FF: I couldn’t tell you that either. Then, let me see, Ruth came here what year? (SF: Ruth came here when I was two so it was ‘44). FF: ‘44, and she was 12 years old. She was 6 when she came to England so she was six years in England. SF: 1938. FF: I think ‘39 they left. That’s what I think. Then they had to give some addresses from whoever is in America and my sisters gave my address and they sent me a letter from Blumsberry (sp?) House which I signed, that I would support the children. That’s what I had to do. Support the children.
SF: You did what? Send $10 each?
FF: $10 each.
SF: How was it determined after six years for them to come here?
FF: They asked for so many things. The people she stood with. The one Ruth stood with in London, they wanted parfum and nylons and all. . I used to stand on line. I didn’t get nylons for myself but I got nylons for them. Then the color wasn’t right. Then they wanted parfum. They wanted all this kind of business. Bianca was with very, very nice people. They had no children. They must have been wonderful people. Then Ruth. . they were bombed out in London. Then they sent them to the country and then Ruth was with this woman. No first she was with the young woman whose husband was in the army and she was sleeping with a lot of soldiers. Then Ruth had to go in other peoples gardens and pull down the diapers to steal diapers and she couldn’t do it so the woman threw her out. Then she was taken to another woman, an elderly woman who was a spiritualist who told her that she has to become a spiritualist and she has to change her religion. She wouldn’t do it so she locked her in a chicken coop, and Ruth nearly crawled up the wall. For days she locked her in a chicken coop so, when she let her out, she run away. Then the mayor took her and he went through town with her. He say’s “I have a child here. Can anybody use a child? . Can you have a child?” So this man was outside, Mr. Youth, and he fixed his wood shed and he says “Oh, give her to me. I have 11 so I might as well as 12" and he took her in. They were very good to her, but she used to have to go at night and get beer in the pubs and then she had frostbitten feet and frostbitten hands. But they were very good otherwise to her.
SF: Are those the people from Edinburgh?
FF: No they are from Windsor. I used to send them things. God, I tell you how I used to cry. I went to the post office, I packed the package and we didn’t have much ourselves. Then I came to the post office and then the package was an inch too big on this side and a half an inch to small on this side and they had to send you home and you had to repack the whole thing. You had to send so many things along, paperwork and ooooooo.
SF: Who decided to bring Ruth and Bianca over here?
FF: Well, we wanted them for the longest time but they didn’t let them go. It was too dangerous. Then they wrote that they can go on a freighter. Before we could answered that they can go on the freighter they sent us a telegram, the Council of Jewish Women, that the kids are, that Ruth is coming and she came on Thanksgiving.
SF: How about Bianca?
FF: She came later. I don’t know really know for sure.
SF: How come Ruth came to you and Bianca went to the relatives in New Jersey?
FF: Well, Ruth had me only as relatives and Bianca had the ones in Jersey. Beatrice was the same age as she was. Then Ida helped along right away.
SF: What was the relation with the people in Jersey to Bianca?
FF: It was her uncle, and she had an uncle in New York which she didn’t get along with. An uncle and aunt she fought with them in New York. (SF: On her father’s side?) FF: Yah, yah. So she went to Newark, to Jersey, to them.
SF: What was your reaction when Ruth came?
FF: I don’t know anymore, Steven. I was scared to death to get a big girl like this.
SF: What was my reaction?
FF: I wouldn’t know either. She just. . er...she didn’t know a banana, she didn’t know an egg, she didn’t know an apple. (SF: She must have know what an egg was. She was locked up in a chicken coop.) They never got eggs to eat. They didn’t give them to her to eat. They sold everything. They put everything into money, those people. It isn’t that those people that they didn’t give her to eat. They didn’t have enough themselves. They all got it on the black market and if you had no connection you got nothing. So it was bad.
SF: Were we living on Parkside Avenue at the time?
FF: We moved downstairs. Before she came. (SF: Why did we move downstairs?) FF: We needed another room. Where are you going to put a 12-year old? (SF: So you moved because you knew she was coming?) FF: Well we wanted to move anyhow to give you a room. (SF: Then Ruth and I shared the room, in the front?) Yeah. Yeah.
SF: How did Ruth’s coming affect the family?
FF: Everybody was happy. We were happy. What I had the trouble with her. You know she was all crippled up. You remember that. Then I had to have braces made for her. (Braces to) straighten her out. She was like this. She was undernourished from not getting the food. Her teeth were bad, and she was like this. Sometimes when you spoke to her she had to look up like this. See her bones were all different. They were all so soft from getting the wrong food. (SF: But she was happy to be in America?) Yeah, she was happy. I’m sure she missed England too, but who worried about that.
SF: The War was on and there were no bombings here.
FF: Yah. Oh she used to scream bloody murder when an ambulance went through to Kings County (Note: name of main local hospital). God, what I went through with her. I tell you. It was terrible.
SF: What clothing did Ruth have?
FF: Not much. Daddy gave me money and I went to Macy’s and I bought her a dress. I didn’t ask her which one she liked, I just bought what I liked. Come to think of it years later, how wrong could be...
SF: Then she started going to school?
FF: They put her right away in the right class. (SF: 12 years old, she would have gone to the 6th grade. Did she go to PS 92 then?) Sure. (SF: Then she went to Erasmus.) That’s right.
SF: Did she do a lot of babysitting?
FF: Yeah. She did babysitting.
SF: Did she go out a lot?
FF: Yeah. She had nice boyfriends. The girls went out and got boyfriends. I don’t know. You ask me things that are 30 years ago. That’s a little old. 25 she’s married. You know, you better send something on her anniversary.
SDF: These are what Jewish grandmothers say and you need to keep it there so her great, great grandchildren can see what she was like.
SIDE TWO
SF: Your mother had twelve siblings, including Saler and some others. What were their names.
FF: Aunt Regina, Aunt Saler, Aunt Maler, Aunt Elsie, Aunt Sophie, Uncle Emmanuel, Uncle Sy, a sister and a brother died when they were young. I don’t know. I really don’t know. I never met them. SF: How many of those do we know other than Saler?
FF: Maler, Elsie.
SF: Did they come to America? FF: Yeah. They came to America. Er, Irving...That’s right.
SF: Did anyone else come to America?
FF: Not from those sisters. They died before. Normal death.
SF: W was related. (SF: So they’re from one of the 12?) Yah. The uncles were sent to America. They were all sent to America when they were 13. (SF: These were your mother’s brothers?) My mother’s brothers. After they were 13 years old, after their bar mitzvah they all went to America. That was Uncle Emanuel, and Ruth and Marian’s father, and another uncle, I forgot his name. There were three brothers. Emanuel had two sons, one who died and one...two died but one died when he was young and the other died as long as I am in America. Then Marian’s father, they had the two girls, and then there was Aunt Gussie and her husband. I forgot her husband’s name. I forgot. I never...
SF: And they didn’t have any children?
FF: Well, I just told you the children. Marian’s father and Uncle Emanuel had two sons. They died. I just told you that. (SF: Did they have any children?) I don’t think so. One was young when he died and the other one I don’t think he was ever married. I really don’t know to much about that.
SF: Irving and Saler and all those were from Tante Regina? FF: Yah.
SF: She was the only one who sent all her children here?
FF: No. She was dead already when they went here. Well Simon, who went to Detroit as an engineer, he studied in the Mercedes Benz, in Gargenau (sp?) in Germany he studied. He came here as a young man and then he had Irving come but they never got along, so Irving went to Portland, Oregon and he didn’t get along there either so then he just went around from city to city and (to Scott—take your finger out) and then finally came to New York and that’s where he got a job with relatives, Baer, Sterns and Company.
SF: Did Simon bring the others in?
FF: Yah. They came in through Hitler’s times, they came in.
SF: Was Saler married to Uncle Hugo at the time?
FF: Oh yeah. Trudy was there already. She was married many, many years.
SF: Were all your relatives in Germany orthodox? You said your parents were.
FF: None of them. None of them.
SF: We were the most.
SF: Did my father ever talk about the inflation in Germany?
FF: No. He was young yet.
SF: My father studied Hebrew under the father of the woman in Israel?
FF: He went to Hebrew school like I went to Hebrew school.
SF: Did he ever study Talmud or things like that?
FF: (laughing) No, no. Daddy was far removed from Talmud.
SF: Did he ever talk about Israel?
FF: Well at the time, I tell you, Steven, at the time we had enough to talk about ourselves and getting along and making a living and working hard. Israel was very far away. It was that time, when did Israel become it’s own state? (SF: ‘48). ‘48. Daddy was still alive then. We never talked too much about Israel. (SF: Not even about the idea?) Oh yeah. We...Daddy used to say “If I would have gone to Israel then I probably would have a farm and God knows what” so I used to say “You would have to go alone because I wouldn’t want to be a farmer’s wife. I had enough farming home.” We never really had the things to go. I mean to visit, yes, but it was too far away. You know you still had to work with your hands and get where you were. Don’t forget when daddy died (Note: 1953) you were 11, Ruth was 21, a few months later Ruth got sick, you had to go to public school, to high school, to college. So those kinds of ideas to go somewhere were too far removed.
SF: Did he philosophically agree with Israel?
FF: Oh yah, yah. We used to read about it and he said many times “What those people do, I wish we could do more for them.”
SF: Did he have any relatives or friends there?
FF: Yah, he had cousins there and we wrote once to. . but the letter came back and nobody could find them. I don’t remember their name. That was all.
SF: How about our relatives in Israel? Do we have any?
FF: No.
SF: Didn’t you buy some bonds?
FF: Not bonds. We gave to the Kerem Kayemet. That was this organization where you planted the trees. My father gave a lot to that. We helped in every way we could with money.
SF: Did you father help with Israel too? What other things did he do?
FF: Well that was the only thing at that time to do. Planting trees.
SF: There were groups sending young pioneers to Israel.
FF: Yeah, we did help. He gave me money once. There was one near Munich in Wolfratshausen. They trained people to go to Israel. You know, young people they trained them there. They had like farming things and they need money and so, whenever I came home, he says to me “Give them some money.” So he used to give me some money and then I bought meat for them or whatever, when I went to visit. There was another one near Bamberg and I went there too and visit and brought them something.
SF: So you knew some of the people who were going?
FF: Oh yeah. They wanted me the worst way to go with them. Oh they wanted me. How they wanted me to go to Israel but I just didn’t want to go.
SF: Were these people you grew up with?
FF: No. I had this boyfriend who went to Bamberg to this Hecha...they called it Hechalutz and so they invited me. I even have pictures of...I wonder where they are...and I went there and visited and the one who owned the house, where they had this Hechalutz in, used to go to school with my father. He had a small hotel while the others we all, ten of them, in one room. You know how those camps are, those things are. I was always there. So my papa always said “You don’t go. You just stay home with us.” I used to say “Papa, you don’t have to warn me. I wouldn’t go.” I just didn’t like that life.
SF: Who gave you the picture of the old man?
FF: He painted it himself. He was a professor, Zeigler, in Nürnberg. He gave it to me. He liked me. (SF: When you were leaving?) Before. Before I left. He said to me, before I graduated, he said to me “I want you to have something of mine.” When he gave it to me I couldn’t believe it because he painted months and months and whenever we came in the room he laid over like this, nobody should see it. Then he gave it to me in a roll, scroll, and he said to me “I don’t want you to open it now” he says. “When you go home, you open it.” He wrote a note to it too. (SF: What did the note say?) That he liked me a lot and that I was very attentive, and very accurate in my answers. He just liked me. He was a wonderful man.
SF: What was he a teacher of?
FF: English. Not English. Literature or something. To speak right. To you know, poems and things like that. (SF: What we call English?) FF: Yah. I wanted to say English but it wasn’t English.
SF: Who is it a picture of, did he say?
FF: No. He just said a Jew prayer. I tell you something. For years I didn’t want it because it looked to me like a Polish Jew, a Russian Jew. It didn’t look like a German Jew and I couldn’t say it. When I opened it up once, oh, my father loved it. It’s a Mizrach. It should be hung east. But I wouldn’t even know where east is here (Note: she did have it hanging on the eastern wall of her apartment.) I never know which side is east. Is east. East is where Israel is. That’s what we were taught. If it’s wrong then I was taught wrong.
SF: If you are here then you pray toward Israel. If you are in Israel you pray toward Jerusalem, and if you are in Jerusalem you pray toward where the Sanctuary was.
FF: Yah. Did you read this week in the paper (about) Goldie Hawn? Wasn’t that interesting? She’s a lovely girl.
SF: Did my father ever talk about his parents?
FF: He loved his mother dearly. His father, he didn’t have too much love for his father because he was the one who supported the family from almost childhood on. Everybody who came from Buttenwiesen used to say to me “You got the best. He worked and worked and worked to support the family and never got anything.” He always wanted a motorcycle and whenever he had the money ready for a motorcycle, his father started building more towards the house. They had the most beautiful house in town and every time he had $150, mark ready for a motorcycle his father invested it in the house. Then he had this other brother who was in Munich which I knew. He was very good looking. He went to school, he went to like real schul, business school, and he paid for everything. Daddy paid for everything. He married his sister out and he gave along 10,000 marks. He made it all, as a cattle dealer more than a butcher. He used to ride on his bicycle from morning till night and he just wanted a motorcycle. But he loved his mother. When I was pregnant with you he said “I don’t want you to lay on the floor and do the floor” so I said “Who should do it?” He said “I do it. I did it for my mother.” I said “You’re not doing it for me.” See he was spoiled. He was kind of like you, like sloppy because he worked all day so when he came home at night his mother did everything for him. The others sat around, didn’t do a darn thing. They were spoiled rotten. I can’t understand that. That one person had to work for everybody.
SF: How did he feel about his brothers and sisters?
FF: Well he liked them. He liked them a lot. But they were not as ambitious as he was. One became a baker, in the Hitler time, and one became a businessman, Ludwig I think. Karl and Ernst, I don’t know what the other one became. They had to do whatever there was to do. They couldn’t do anything else anymore. They told them you do this and you do that, and if you didn’t do it.... You don’t know how lucky you are Scott, that you can pick what you want to pick.
SF: You don’t know what the brothers did for a living?
FF: One became a baker. I don’t know what the other (SF: Which one?) I think it was Ludwig, no Karl, Karl. I’m not quite sure Steven. I don’t know for sure.
SF: Did they go away from home?
FF: No, they never went away from home. In fact, when they were supposed to go to concentration camp, the mother and father went with them. They weren’t even told to go then, but they went. But Ludwig, the younger, youngest, he was married and he had a wife and a beautiful boy, Paul.
SF: What was his wife’s name?
FF: Irene.
SF: They all went to the camps?
FF: Yah. He was a beautiful boy. They used to send his pictures here.
SF: Were all the brothers bar mitzvahed?
FF: Oh yah.
SF: Did my father ever talk about his bar mitzvah?
FF: Well I tell you something. They weren’t much made out of bar mitzvahs in Germany. I remember this boy in our town, Josef, who used to be my boyfriend. He had bar mitzvah so I was very generous. I gave him a tie. I still remember, I brought the tie...my mother wrapped it. I said “You don’t have to wrap it up.” She says “Yes, you do.” So she wrapped it up and I went down and I said “That’s your bar mitzvah present.” It was a silk tie. It was one thing. It didn’t even have much shape. But there wasn’t much made for bar mitzvah. You went to the temple and aufgarufen (called up) and you’re a man and maybe you got a piece of chicken extra. There wasn’t a big spiel made.
SF: Did my father ever say what his haftorah portion was?
FF: If he did, I forgot. Tell you the truth. See, I tell you something Steven, the time, when the time came that you sit down and talk things over and keep on talking about the things, that was when we came to here, to Rockville (MD). Otherwise there was always a struggle or other. You know that yourself. I got up everyday, went to work, came home at 6 o’clock and you were too tired and daddy wasn’t there anymore. When daddy was alive, he left the house 3 in the morning. He came home 3 in the afternoon and then he slept. Then we ate and then he went back to bed.
SF: You said other people came from Buttenwiesen.
FF: Yah, yah. I had them once. I surprised him once and had them invited for Thanksgiving.
SF: Who were they? FF: The Klopfers. They died too. Their son is a professor at Pittsburgh University. I kept in touch till Mr. Klopfer died. Hildie was a good friend of daddy’s. Oh she really loved him. She told me that she really loved him and that he was so good and so hard working and so decent. I invited them and her mother. Then Hildie worked in Lord and Taylor and I went there very often and then he came in and then we went to eat out. He was a very fine man. Then Hilda died. She went up the steps to go to work and she couldn’t catch her breath. When she got to Lord and Taylor she looked so bad they took her to the doctor who said “Take her to the hospital.” She never came home. Then he home alone. He was robbed twice. He went to his son, to Pittsburgh, who is married to a Chinese or Japanese girl, very fine girl, they have a lot, I think four or five children. That killed...suffered terrible through that. Then two years ago I sent him always a package to the nursing home in Pittsburgh and I didn’t hear from him. He didn’t say ‘thank you’ and I didn’t hear from him. Then somebody who lives in Paula’s (Note: Seligman) house in Flushing, in that complex, told me that he died. But the son didn’t let me know. When Hilda died he let me know. He came here. He called me up here but when his father died he didn’t. He probably didn’t know anything... His father (probably said) call up Flora but when he died there was no one there. How do you know some of those old friends?
SF: You said your father served in World War I. Did my father’s father and family also serve?
FF: Yah. He served also. He served, I think, in France. Your father’s father. That’s where that little ring came from. Marcie has that ring. Where I had the diamond put in. That’s from his father. He brought that home from the War. I think from France.
SF: And then his mother gave it to him when he left?
FF: Yeah. Gave it to daddy and she said he should give it to his wife to be. That’s the ring I got. (SF: That was your engagement ring?) Didn’t get an engagement ring. Got a watch. He couldn’t afford a ring.
SF: Your sister lived in Munich. Did you go to visit her?
FF: I was in Munich all the time. (SF: I thought you were in Nürnberg?) In school, but I was in München for years.
SF: When were you in Nürnberg and when were you in München?
FF: Hm, hm, hm. I don’t the years I was in Nürnberg. (SF: Well how old were you?) Twelve. From 12 to 16 or 17, 18. From 12 to 16. I hated Nürnberg. I hated that city. They were such showy people. They walked around with diamonds and with fur coats. I hated that city, and it was such a dirty city because it...see, they’re making a lot of toys there. Nürnberg is known for it. There was a saying “Nürnberger tan gehts durch ganzer land,” what they make goes through the whole country. Also the lebküchen, that’s a specialty from Nürnberg. Then I went to München and München was entirely different. München was sporty. You didn’t go around with all this glitter and all that thing. That was just for me. Not that showoff business. Oh München was a beautiful city. (SF: How long were you in München?) Five and a half years.
SF: Did you live with your sister there?
FF: No, I worked in München. (SF: From when you were 16?) I think I was 18. I lived with where I worked. With the Bambergers.
SF: You liked München?
FF: Oh I loved Munich. I loved Munich. I loved Munich like I love New York.
SF: What did you do there?
FF: Worked in a butcher store. In a kosher butcher store. Bookkeeping....
SF: What did you do for relaxation.
FF: Skiing and sport events and dancing and hiking and rowing with boats and did all those things which young people do. It was great, München. Oh München was beautiful. I had so many boyfriends. They used to call up and I used to make an appointment with one and then another one called up and then I fell bad that I made it up with them and then I broke it and had an excuse and then we went out to those boats were battling and doing things and there they were and got me. They said “What are you doing here?” Then they didn’t speak to me for weeks. You know when you’re young you do those kind of things. But Munich was beautiful.
SF: Then you went home afterwards to try to get your papers?
FF: Yah. That was the biggest mistake I ever made. (SF: Why?) I wanted to be together with my parents. Because the Nazis were so bad. They hurt. They hurt and they hit and they broke the windows and they, they just did everything to hurt you.
SF: It wouldn’t have been better if you stayed in Munich.
FF: Sure. It would have been better. Munich didn’t bother you. People didn’t bother you. For me it would have been better but I wanted to be with my parents.
SF: Are there any stories of anti-Semitism before the Nazis?
FF: No. Not really. There weren’t. They used to call you some names. They never called me names. They were afraid of me but they used to call Ida names. Don’t ever let Ida read those tapes. Don’t ever, whatever you do, because she would feel very bad. Because she didn’t have it as easy as I had. Don’t ever let her read the tapes, or hear the tapes.
SF: So they called Ida names, anti-Semitic names.
FF: Yah, oh yah. All kinds of names. She came to me crying so I said “Ok, let’s go.” Then we went. When we passed she says, she was hiding behind me, I said “That’s your whole trouble. You’re hiding behind me. Stand in front.” I took some sticks along. As soon as they opened their mouth I threw the sticks. I had a very heavy book, book thing you know where you had your books on (SF: Knapsack.) It wasn’t a knapsack it was a real book thing. A leather thing. I took my thing off, they came near me and I hit them with my book thing over the head. That guy was laying on the floor. They were all running. They thought he died. I said “I wish he would.” When he opened his eyes I said “You call me again Judische stinker.” He says “I didn’t call you, I called Ida.” I said “Doesn’t make a difference. You called us, called us a bad name.” They never did. They were like this. But nobody else ever did except those. They were really low class people. Poor. Nasty. Lazy. Drinkers.
SF: Germany has a history of anti-Semitism.
FF: We really...well I tell you...no, I shouldn’t say. There was the mayor. The mayor told me, when I went there for my..., he was terrible. That came with the Hitler thing. Before, he wasn’t. Maybe he had it in him but I never felt. When I went there to get my birth certificate, he says “I don’t give Jews birth certificates. I give them only death certificates.” So (his wife) she said to him, whatever his name was, she said “Please give Flora her birth certificate.” He said “You open your mouth once more, you’re going to get a death certificate together with her.” So I had to go out and I went home and I couldn’t get it. Then I had to go Stuttgart to go where the consulate is. To scare him. To take a lawyer to get my birth certificate. I tell you something, when I think what hard times that was. It’s just heartbreaking.
SF: You talked last time when the Nazis came and threw the soup ladle through the window. How many times did they come?
FF: While I was home they came about three times. I saw them coming up the hill and I stood against the door and I ?? Like this. My mother said “Please come away” and I said “No.” So they opened up and they pushed me in. They said “Who was that” and I said “Me.” I said “You got no right in our house.” He said “You open your mouth once more.” I said “I do because you got no right in our house. That’s our house.” He just pushed me away .... My mother was shivering. She felt terrible. I just couldn’t believe. I could not believe that they could do those things. I think if I would have stood home longer they would have killed me. I really think so. I would have killed them. I really would have. There wouldn’t have been anything too much for me to do. When they broke our broke our window I said to my mother “I keep a piece of glass. They come in there I cut their throat.” My mother looked at me. She says “What are you saying?” I said “Yah, I wouldn’t take a knife but that I (would) use.” I think I would have done it. You know, they get you so psyched up. For no reason at all they come into your house, open the drawers, turn the drawers around, go through. They didn’t even know what they went through and you stand there and watch it. I can’t believe it. To this day I can’t believe it.
SF: They came three times? FF: When I was there they came three times. As long as I was home. Once they killed the dogs. Yeah, killed the dogs. (SF: Did the dogs do anything?) FF: They just looked. Sure they were hollering. They killed them right there. (SF: How many dogs? Saint Bernards?) Yah. Two big ones. My little one died before. That was terrible.
SF: Did they take anything while you were there? Confiscate anything?
FF: I don’t think so. I don’t think so. No. I didn’t see anything.
SF: So why did they come? Just to mess up the house?
FF: Yah. They wanted to make it miserable for you. Just miserable. They said to my mother “You got nice order in your drawers. I never seen such nice order in drawers.” My mother said “Thank you.”
SF: So they wanted to scare them, make them leave?
FF: That’s what do. They want you to leave. But where were you going to go. You didn’t know where to go. “That one” he said once. “That one” meaning me. I said “What’s the matter with that one? That one doesn’t take your baloney” I said. My mother used to say “Kind (child) you have to go. You bring yourself and us in unglücklich (unhappiness). In schlimmazel. (Bad luck). I just...I couldn’t believe it. It was not, none of the ones I knew. They came from a different town. I didn’t even know who they were. They just looked like hoodlums.
SF: Uncle Leo was stopped from selling kosher meat. Did they stop your father from dealing in cattle?
FF: Oh yeah. Oh sure. Naturally. Sure they stopped him. I don’t even know, I was wondering many times. My parents must have lived just from the money they had in the bank. Because my father couldn’t do any more business. I don’t know. See, you couldn’t say “Papa do you have enough money to live on or do you have a lot or do you have a little.” You didn’t ask such questions. I just said once to my father. He told me that once that he has a life insurance or whatever that is for me, and when I am 20-something I’m gonna get the money paid out. But I don’t know. When the lawyer wrote back they said they have no papers from my parents except that they don’t owe any taxes. So if they have no papers, how do they know that they didn’t owe any taxes? Yeah, it was terrible.
Bianca went through a lot. She was there much longer. She went through a lot. She with my parents. She surely did. Oh, what they did to that kid you wouldn’t believe. She couldn’t go to school anymore in our town. Then my sister took her to the smaller town and it was, you had to go a while, and then she didn’t come home. She didn’t come home, so my sister was worried so she went to look for her. There was a big thing, Easter where they rolled the Easter eggs, a hill, a big hill and then she heard somebody crying and she went down. There was Bianca laying there all beaten up, her eyes swollen, her face swollen. She really went through a lot. That’s really true. She had a terrible, terrible youth. Then my sister sent her to Munich. Then she acted up.
SF: She went to live with your other sister? Yah. She says if you hit me or if you holler at me I going to call Hitler. I’m gonna tell Hitler. She had Kissinger as a teacher. (SF: The father?) No, the uncle. The father was in Nürnberg. The uncles were in Munich. They were such big men, with such big stomachs.
SF: What route did you take to get out of Germany?
FF: Took a train to Paris, because I had a boyfriend there. I promised my father in his hand that I will not stay in Paris. He says “You leave, you have to leave Europe because if its here, it might be tomorrow...” My father was very smart. So I said “Papa, if I tell you.” He says “I want you to take my hand and promise me in my hand that you will go to America. That you will not stay in France.” He says “Why do you want to go to France?” I said “I want to see my friend once more.” They had the papers for me. His uncle was a veterinarian in Paris and they had the papers for me and they were all excited that it took them so...hard job to get the papers and I told them I can’t take it. They were religious. (From there) I went to Le Havre . I had so many flowers on the boat. All the friends. Boyfriends sent me flowers. Lebring (?) , he sent me flowers from Paris and I had some sent from Germany. Yeah, that was nice. (SF: What was the name of the boat?) . Britannia. Britannic. Cunard Lines, because I didn’t want to go with a German line. (SF: When did it sail?) I think April to May of ‘38. I think I came here in May. (SF: How long did it take to get across?) About a week and a half I think. Maybe two weeks. Stopped in Ireland. Took in a lot of those Irish. They all looked like underprivileged. They looked like such poor people. Yah.
SF: When you came to America, who was here to greet you?
FF: Oh God. Herbert Winter. The Weils. Aunt Saler and Uncle Hugo and Trudy. They were all fighting over me, where I go with. So I went with Saler because they wrote to me last. Gretl was standing there so a week after I went to Gretl. I always had to wander, not to hurt anyone. Saler they lived in Flushing at that time. They hardly had any room.
SF: You can with one trunk and the other trunk went on another train?
FF: I never saw it. I had those big trunks. I had one with all coats and suits which I never saw and I had the second one. There was some linen in there and some clothes and then I had a suitcase with me yet. You know, where I needed the clothes on the boat. I still know some dresses I had made, and underwear I had made, all handmade. When you think of it. The ideas I had. There were all made in a cloister by nuns. They were beautiful. Silk. (SF: Where was the cloister?) Dinkelsbühl. Had to go there. I went there with the bicycle all the time. (SF: So you had clothes made there regularly?) . No. The clothes I had made home. We had a woman coming from Nürnberg and she made our clothes for all the years. For all the years. So she came before I left and made...I designed my own clothes the way I wanted. I had really beautiful clothes but I never had a winter coat because the coat was in the trunk which I never got. (SF: What did you wear for a winter coat?) Hah hmm, two blouses. I had an English tweed coat. That’s what I wore. So I wore two blouses and some underwear, and then two years later I bought a coat. (SF: How much money did you have when you came over?) I had about 15. . $1800. I think about $2000 from... (SF: With you?) No, that was sent from the Swiss bank (SF: How much of that did you smuggle into Switzerland?) About $1500. (SF: How many skiing trips?) Every time I went. Sometimes we went four and five times a winter and sometimes we went three times. That’s there for years. That’s not there for the last year or two (Note: only). That was there a long time.
(SF: You said you smuggled some out in the skis?) All of it went out like that. For years we did that. I tell you.
SF: Do you remember at all Kristalnacht?
FF: I wasn’t there. I wasn’t in Germany. (I was) In America. I was there before when they stood guard in front of the Jewish stores and didn’t let anyone in, and I went in, in München. I said “I want to go in you better let me go in.” He says “You can’t go in.” I said “I’m going in.” I went in and then they said to me “Do me a favor. Go out. You get in trouble and we get in trouble.” So the fella said to me “For my part you can go where you want” he says, “but you’re gonna get hurt so you better go out. Don’t do that. You get in trouble.
SF: Wasn’t Ruth’s father involved with Kristalnacht.
FF: They all were. They all were.
SF: What happened to the rest of the family?
FF: Steven, I was here. They couldn’t tell me. They all were thrown in jail. My parents were thrown in jail. They all were thrown in jail. Ruth’s father was in Dachau. They were all....but I was here. When they burned the temples and when they burned all the books, I was here. That was the ninth of November. Daddy was there. That’s when they took daddy to a concentration camp. To Dachau. See daddy came a year later than I did.
SF: He went to Dachau after Kristalnacht? FF: Yah, yah. They took him.
FF: I tell you why we didn’t talk much about it. When he came here he still had this in him, this fear and this thing, and the man died in his arms. They gave them shoes to wear and the shoes were two numbers too small and some people said “I can’t wear the shoes, they too small.” But they had to march all day long and the ones that couldn’t march they just shot.
SF: Was the man who died in his arms an older man?
FF: He was an older man. He couldn’t march so they shot him.
SF: Did my father ever talk about the food or the sanitary conditions or anything?
FF: He couldn’t. He couldn’t. He used to go at night in his sleep like this. (SF: And flail his arms?) Yeah. He couldn’t talk about it. No he couldn’t talk about it. He always said that. Somebody wanted to ask...we were once somewhere, I don’t know. Yeah, we went once to New York somewhere. Daddy had relatives there. His sister’s sister-in-law and they were people there who were in concentration camps and he went out in the bathroom and he didn’t come back for an hour. He couldn’t hear it. It brought back everything. (SF: He didn’t talk about the food or anything?) I don’t know if he did or didn’t. If he did I forgot. He was in Dachau, he was I think for three months. Two or three months.
SF: He must have been home for six to nine months before he came (to America.)
FF: Yah. When did daddy come here. I think he came in May. November, December, January, February, March....yah, he was home maybe about six months after that. Sure it took you a long time. They didn’t have any relatives here to get the papers so it was very hard. There was a gentile person home who had a brother somewhere, I think in Philadelphia, who also helped daddy with an affidavit. In daddy’s town there were the gentiles, they were much, much better than in our town. (SF: Do you know the name of the man who helped get him out of Dachau?) . No. He died a long time ago too but I don’t know. (SF: Was he the mayor of the town?) No, he was just a good friend of...we were friends with all the gentile people. They were all our friends. We didn’t know any different. I went to school with those kids, we didn’t even know that...you know, we respected them and they respected us. Then they couldn’t talk to us anymore.
SF: Were there other people who I knew when I was growing up who were in the camps? Clothilde Lehman? Sophie?
FF: Yah she (Clothilde Lehman–Bianca’s mother-in-law) was. No. Sophie wasn’t. Sophie was here long before. Sophie came here in 1934. You mean Sophie Rothberg. No, she came here in 1934. There were the Meyers, the Meyers who daddy...that Larry, no what was his name? I forgot. He lives in Florida now if he is still alive. He and daddy were together in the same group in Dachau and then they met in Prospect Park and then we became good friends again. The Hamburgers weren’t there. They were here already. Uncle Leo was here already.
SF: How about the people who owned the tailor shop around the corner?
FF: The Levys? Yah, he was in Dachau too. Mr. Levy was in Dachau too. A lot of them Steven but I shocked it out of my system and now you ask me those kind of things and I don’t remember anymore. Yah, the Levys were too. Mr. Levy was in Dachau. He talked many times about it, but he couldn’t either for the first few years. Those were very, very hard times and people wanted to forget it, and not remember it.
SF: What sports did my father do?
FF: Football (soccer). He was very good at soccer. (SF: Gymnastics?) Oh yeah. Remember he such a well developed body. (SF: Did his brothers and sisters also do sports?) He only had one sister. I don’t know.
SF: Did he do any sports when he came over here?
FF: Yeah, (feigned laughing) he walked from Newkirk Avenue to Atlantic Avenue to save a nickel. That was his sport. How could we do anything. I wrote to Gretl Weil if I should bring my skis and she said “They don’t ski in America.”
