United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Erika Tamar
December 18, 2015
RG-50.030*0863
PREFACE The following interview is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
ERIKA TAMARPRIVATE
December 18, 2015
Question: This is a United States Holocaust Memorial Museum interview with Mrs. Erika Tamar, on December 18th, 2015, in Manhattan, New York. Thank you very, very much to – for agreeing to speak with us today, to share your experiences, your early years, and to acquaint some of the people who will be watching this interview about what the circumstances were of your leaving Europe and coming to the United States. I’m going to start with the most basic questions, and then we’ll go from there, okay?
Answer: Sure.
Q: So, can you tell me what was the date of your birth?
A: June 10th, 1934.
Q: Okay.
A: In Vienna.
Q: That was my second question, where were you born?
A: Vienna, Austria.
Q: Okay. And what was your name at birth?
A: Erika Tamar.
Q: Erika Tamar.
A: I reverted back to my maiden name.
Q: Okay. Tell me – tell me a little bit about your family. What were your father’s na – what was your father’s name, and your mother’s name?
A: My father’s name is Julius Tamar, my mother is Pauline Hutterer Tamar. My father was a physician, and he practiced in Vienna. He graduated from University of Vienna Medical School. But both my parents were originally from Poland, which explains a little bit why my brother and I had to come separately, because we were Viennese born, which was one quota system. Polish born was a whole different quota system.
Q: We’ll get there. We’ll –
A: My – my parents –
Q: Yeah.
A: Much harder –
Q: Yeah.
A: – to, you know, get –
Q: To come to the United St –
A: – to come to the United States. Almost hopeless because there was a long waiting list. Am I going on too long, or –
Q: No, no, no, no, I will ask questions.
A: Yeah.
Q: What we’re going to start with though is, rather than the trip to the United States, I want to find out as much as I can about the years before then.
A: Okay.
Q: About your family’s situation. Can you repeat again your mother’s maiden name?
A: Hutterer.
Q: Hutterer?
A: Hutterer, h-u-t-t-e-r-e-r.
Q: Okay, and –
A: And both my parents born in Poland, my father came to Vienna to go to medical school, and remained in Vienna. And my mother had met him in Poland, th-then joined him at the university.
Q: Okay.
A: I don’t know if she was a serious student, or she was following my father, frankly.
Q: Yeah.
A: And then they lived in Vienna, though they still had families in Poland.
Q: Do you know what part of Poland?
