NAME: RABBI JUDAH NADICH INTERVIEWER: LILLY SINGER
CAMP: DACHAU DATE: SEPTEMBER 24, 1981
Q: It is September 24, 1981. I am in New York City with Rabbi Judah Nadich. That is J-U-D-A-H, last name N-A-D-I-C-H of Park Avenue Synagogue at 50 E. 87th St. New York, New York 10028. Rabbi Nadich was born on May 13, 1912. At the time of liberation, he was 33 years old and he was already an ordained rabbi. He was attached to the Theater Headquarters, European Theater of operations. At the time of liberation, he was a Major and he was involved in liberating the camp of Dachau near Munich. I would like to know when you first were told about the camps and knew about concentration camps and what was going on in them.
A: The first that I knew about concentration camps and actually knew what had happened in them was soon after the liberation of Dachau when I received a telephone call from my friend, Rabbi Ely A. Bohnen, who was at that time the Jewish Chaplain with the 42nd Rainbow Division. He called me from Dachau, told me of the horrible, incredible conditions that the men of the 42nd Division found upon liberating Dachau. He continued to describe the survivors, the dying among them and the wounded among them, and explained that many of the survivors would not live for long, because the effects of malnutrition and imprisonment had already gone too far, and they could not be rescued. However, he said the doctors of the 42nd Division were working day and night on the people who had survived at Dachau, and were trying their very best to try to save as many as possible.
Q: Can you give me a time frame and also a placement where you were at the time when you received the phone call?
A: When I received the phone call, I was at European Theater Headquarters, which at that time was in Paris. A section of the headquarters had moved ahead to Germany to Frankfurt, and I was soon to follow to Frankfurt. As to the exact date, I am not certain. I could only find it by going to the trouble of looking through the pages of my wartime diary, but it was sometime in the spring of 1945.
Q: Was there any talk in the headquarters about the concentration camps? Did you get any directives from the higher-ups concerning concentration camps and what's going on in them or directives on what to do once the Army enters them, etc.? A: The question is interesting because soon after I came to the forward section of headquarters at Frankfurt in order to become the advisor on Jewish affairs to the commanding general of the European Theater of Operations, mainly General Eisenhower. Soon after arriving, I began to do some research in the matter, because my job was to spend every day of the week visiting the survivors of the concentration camps and reporting back to General Eisenhower so that improvement could be made in their condition. Upon arriving at Headquarters in Frankfurt, I spent many hours going through all of the directives and the orders that had been prepared a long time earlier for the G-5 Division of Headquarters, namely Civil Government -- the officers and men who were to exercise the powers of a civil government in Germany once it would be conquered. Nowhere in these directives or in these regulations was there any mention of the possibility that when the concentration camps would be captured, there would be people who would refuse to go to their previous homes, and who would remain as a problem for the American Army. The directives spoke about the need for collecting all the survivors of German persecution and returning them to their homes in Europe as quickly as possible. It must be said, to the credit of the American Army, that despite the fact that it was involved in gigantic tasks at the time, they did carry out this part of the regulations very effectively. Within 90 days after the capture of the concentration camps, the survivors found in the camps who were not Jewish --the French and the Belgian and the Greek, and the Polish and the Yugoslavs -- who wanted to return to their homes were put aboard trains and were quickly returned to their homes all within three months. I must pause to mention that even among the non-Jews there were those who did not want to return to their homes, not for altogether commendable reasons. For example, there were Yugoslavs and Poles who had fought voluntarily with the Nazis or who had come as contract laborers to work in German industries at high pay. They were afraid to return to their homes now that their governments were Communist governments for fear of retribution. So, they too remained. But the big problem was the 80,000 or so Jews who were found alive in the death camps in Germany. I am speaking now of the American Zone. The problem was that no directives, no regulations, no plans had been made beforehand to take care of them. One cannot fault the Army for this lack of planning because one would have had to have been a prophet to be able to foresee that there would be people left, survivors of the concentration camps, who would refuse to return to their previous homes in Poland, in Lithuania, and other lands, and who would insist on being sent to other places altogether. Hence, there were no plans made in advance for these people. The result was that within the three months after liberation nothing was done to help send the Jews to countries where they wanted to go. Where did they want to go? When I first came to the camps, the great majority - - I would say 80% -- wanted to go to what was then called Palestine. The remaining 20% wanted to go the United States, some to France, some to England, some to Canada, and to South American countries and to Australia. They wanted to go to these countries, but the Army had no plans to send them to these countries.
Moreover, because the Army was not prepared to have people remain in camps or on German soil under American Army supervision, there were no plans even for housing and feeding and clothing them, and giving them medical attention and all the rest. This, therefore, was the big job that had to be undertaken.
Q: When you speak of camps, are you speaking of Dachau and what other camps?
A: When I speak of camps in this sense, I now do not speak of Dachau or any other concentration camps for soon after the liberation, the concentration camps were closed to those who had been in them, and Displaced Persons camps were opened in an area geographically close to the former concentration camps. The concentration camps like Dachau did remain open for a specific purpose. General Eisenhower, after he himself visited Dachau, issued an Order that all the troops under his command in Germany must be brought by their Commanders, one group at a time, to view Dachau, so that the American soldiers would know what they had been fighting against.
Q: When did you actually come to Dachau? You were in Paris. You got the phone call from Rabbi Bohnen and when did you actually go in? Did you go alone, or with a unit or with other people? How surprised were you? How shocked were you? When did you first hear of concentration camps, prior to this phone call?
A: It is difficult to say when I first heard about concentration camps. I was in Europe since the summer of 1942. I was the first American Chaplain ordered to Europe. I arrived in Northern Ireland where the first American troops were stationed, and then I spent time subsequently in England, Scotland, Wales, and then in Normandy and then in France. Paris. And I can not pinpoint the time when I first heard of concentration camps. This I know -- that before I got the telephone call from Rabbi Bohnen I knew there were concentration camps. I knew that horrible things were happening there. I got my news primarily from the Army Network News in Europe -- from the Army newspaper, the Stars & Stripes, and occasionally from an American newspaper that would find its way a month late to the troops in Europe.
But during the time that we were fighting in Europe, I was aware of the fact that the Germans were doing terrible things, especially to the Jews. And I was not overwhelmingly surprised when I got the telephone call from Rabbi Bohnen.
However, I was surprised when I came to Dachau for the first time, which must have been somewhere around the beginning of August in 1945. The camp had not been prettied up as yet. It was still in the same condition that it was when it was liberated, except for the fact that the survivors had been taken out of Dachau. Those who were sick were in St. Atilon in the Displaced Persons Hospital there. The others were in the various D P Camps in Bavaria. But the gas chamber and crematorium were still there. And the dog kennels. I was told that large dogs were kept there and were deliberately kept hungry so that Jews and others who were guilty of the least infraction of the rules could be thrown into the area of the hungry dogs to be torn limb from limb. The scratches that I saw on the inside of the door of the gas chamber made by thousands of fingernails is a memory I shall not forget . The sacks, the potato sacks, standing in the corner of the crematorium that were filled with ash from the furnaces of the crematorium and that had stamped upon the outside of the sacks “Fertilizer” was an experience that made my blood run cold, and I thrust my arm into a sack of the human ash and ground the ash with my fingers into my palm, so that I should never forget it. And I have never forgotten it.
Q: We are talking about Rabbi Nadich’s contact with survivors. His initial contacts were with survivors f rom Buchenwald who made their way by themselves by May, 1945 to Paris, and then specifically there were orders from General Eisenhower to Rabbi Nadich which he will now explain.
A: You are correct in saying that soon after the liberation of Buchenwald in early May of 1945, some of the survivors managed to get back to Paris to their original native city, despite the fact that there were no civilian railroad lines running as yet between France and Germany. However, the first survivors whom I met in large numbers I met on German soil. You may recall earlier, I spoke about the fact that the American Army had made no plans for survivors who might wish to remain rather than to return to their own native countries once the camps were liberated. As a result of the lack of plans, the American Army was not able to send these people to the countries they wished to go -- Israel, or Palestine at that time, and America and other countries -- but they had no plans as to what to do for these people in the camps. War correspondents. I recall particularly a correspondent of the then New York Herald Tribune and of the Chicago Daily News had sent blistering articles to their newspapers reporting about the fact that the Jews who had suffered so under the Nazis and then liberated by the American Army were continuing to suffer in the Displaced Persons Camps in which they had been placed after their liberation. The president of the United States, President Truman, sent a Commission to study this situation, headed by Dean Earl Harrison, the dean of the Law School of the University of Pennsylvania. And Dean Harrison reported to President Truman some time later that the conditions were indeed as bad as the war correspondents had described. President Truman sent a cable, a TWX, to General Eisenhower wanting to know what he proposed to do to clean up the situation. General Eisenhower replied that he was appointing immediately the Senior Jewish Chaplain in Europe to serve as his advisor on Jewish affairs, to make recommendations to him, and he asked President Truman if he so wished he could send a high level civilian advisor.
General Eisenhower appointed me as the Senior Jewish Chaplain to serve as his first advisor on Jewish affairs. And that job entailed my spending 4 or 5 days a week visiting the survivors in the Displaced Persons camps and in German cities in all parts of the American zone of Germany. Each week when I would return from my visit to the survivors in the various camps, I would return to Frankfurt to headquarters. I would go to see General Eisenhower or if he was away on a field visit, I would see his Chief of Staff, General Walter Beadle Smith, and report about my findings in the D P Camps and my discussions with the survivors. I would then make a written report and written recommendations, which in almost every case, were later incorporated into directives and orders by President Eisenhower to the various American generals in different parts of Germany to improve the conditions of the displaced persons in various ways -- food, clothing, sports equipment, musical equipment, cultural and educational supplies and the like.
Q: What were your findings in regard to the American soldier who was involved with caring for the displaced people, for the people who came out of the camps?
What were the directives and how were they carried out and to the best of your knowledge, what were the feelings on the part of the American soldier?
A: There are two questions here. One is in regard to the feelings and one is in regard to how the orders were carried out. In regard to the feelings of the ordinary G I, the ordinary American soldier, and with the feelings of the American officers, I would say that in every case that I have had any knowledge of they were most sympathetic, and more than sympathy they were prepared to work their darndest and to give their utmost in order to help the survivors. I mentioned earlier how the American Army doctors with the 42nd Division worked to save the survivors of Dachau when it was liberated. That story can be repeated with every camp's liberation. These Army doctors were non-Jews, Jews, atheists and the like. But feelings of compassion were aroused by the sights they saw in the concentration camps. Similarly, soldiers would work during their off hours in order to help the survivors. They would give away their rations, especially whatever items of so called luxury they had -- cigarettes, chocolate, and the rest -- to chaplains who were going into the camps visiting the survivors. So, generally the feelings were good. . Not only that, I myself had the opportunity several times to test the feelings of the American generals with regard to the survivors. In one case when I was looking for supplies to help a project of the underground movement of survivors to ports in southern France and Italy, to board ships to run the British blockade of Palestine, the particular general I have in mind permitted me to empty a warehouse of prisoner-of-war parcels. He knew what it was intended for, but he pretended not to know. Again a general in Austria whom I asked about a problem concerning the underground movement of Jews into Austria, the American zone from the Russian zone, he pointed out to me on a map on the wall a spot on the border between the two zones where there were no Russian guards and where the Jews could be brought safely across the border into the American zone. With regard to General Eisenhower himself, let me point out that when I first learned that Jews were coming across the American zone in Germany from Poland in large numbers, I asked General Eisenhower whether he would not permit them to continue coming into the American zone, and more important to let them go into the Displaced Person camps where they would have housing and food and clothing. He issued an order permitting that, and some 80,000 Polish Jews crossed the border and came into the American Zone in Germany and, of course, ultimately most of them went to Palestine. For a contrast, let me point out that when General Montgomery was asked to do the same thing in the British Zone of Germany, he refused. He said these Polish Jews are not displaced persons and they have no right to enter the British Zone of Germany. So the attitude was first class. Now let me reply to the second question. The orders were carried out by and large because when the Commanding General orders it, then the assumption is that the orders are to be carried out. In only one major instance did I find that not to be true. I reported to General Eisenhower after one visit to Bavaria that the Displaced Person Camps there still had barbed wire around them and that the Jews in them were allowed out on a pass system, but permitted only 20% out at any particular time. I reported to him how the Jewish survivors in the camps -- and these were all camps under the command of General Patton--complained bitterly that before they were behind barbed wire under the Nazis, and now they were behind barbed wire under the Americans, their liberators, while they saw the Germans, our erstwhile enemies, walking free outside the camp. General Eisenhower ordered that the barbed wire and the pass system be abolished. The next time I returned to Bavaria, I discovered that General Patton had not carried out these orders, that the barbed wire was still there and the pass system was still in effect. When I returned to headquarters and reported this to General Eisenhower, however, he ordered General Patton to report to him the following morning at 8 o'clock, which meant an overnight ride for General Patton from Munich. I was later told by General Walter Beadle Smith, General Eisenhower's Chief of Staff, that Eisenhower said to Patton -- and remember they were close friends from West Point days -- "George, why don't you do something for these Jews?" And General Patton replied, “ Why the hell should I?” To which Eisenhower, who got very angry, burst out with the words "Goddammit, if for no other reason than because I have ordered you to." And General Patton's wind was taken out of his sails. A short time later, General Patton was removed from Commander of the 3rd Army and was given the command of the 15th Army, which was a paper army, it had no troops in it. I don't say that this was the result of General Patton's refusal to carry out the order of a superior officer, but there was a strange combination of circumstances there. There was a Major Smith who was appointed by General Patton to be on his staff and in charge of the Displaced Persons camps in Bavaria. Major Smith was one of the roughest people with whom I ever did business on behalf of the Displaced Persons. He was, of course, reflecting the attitude of his commanding general, General Patton, and it took constant bullying and threatening in order to get Major Smith to issue any kind of directive or regulation to the soldiers of the Third Army with regard to the Jewish Displaced Persons. And even when he did issue these regulations and directives, I was never sure as to how thoroughly they were distributed or carried out.
Q: One of the things I wanted to know is to the best of your knowledge and your observation or some Jewish personnel who might have come to talk to you about it, what was the effect on the soldiers who walked in and saw these people who were bedraggled, hungry, walking skeletons, unable to care for themselves, frightened?
What what were the effects on the soldiers that you personally witnessed or heard about?
A: Of course, I have spoken to many soldiers who were in the units that liberated concentration camps, and their attitude was uniformly the same. They were overwhelmed at what they saw, they could not imagine that human beings could do this to other human beings. And they saw for the first time that all the lies they had been told about the Germans were true. And they tried to do whatever they could to be of help to the survivors, but that period of time lasted for a comparatively brief time. Once the survivors were transferred to the Displaced Persons Camps, their clothing was changed from the old striped pajama-like uniform of the inmates of German concentration camps to ordinary clothing. They were no longer dying of starvation. One of the first orders resulting from my very first visit to the survivors was General Eisenhower's order to all commanders that survivors in Displaced Persons camps, Jewish survivors, must receive a minimum of 1800 calories a day, so that their health condition improved. Those who were really sick were placed in Displaced Persons hospitals or the tubercular sanitarium such as the one at [unintelligible.] So, it was only for a brief period of time that the horrors of the death camps were made evident to the American Army.
Q: What about the emotional reaction? Did the men from the Army come to you and say “These people are not even human or how could this happen to any human being? Did they carry over, or was it something that they said is terrible and then they went out for beer and tried to shut it out and forget about it? What was your experience?
A: It’s true to say that many people can adjust quickly to a tragedy that does not involve them or the people they love or the people they know. I think it is fair to say that as far as the non-Jews in the American Army were concerned that many of them were greatly moved. Many of them called the Germans all kinds of profane names when they first saw the concentration camps, many of them had expressions of bitterness, but these were immediate reactions to a horrible situation; it didn't take long, perhaps the very same evening, before the same soldiers could go into a tavern and order some beer and forget about it. I don't think it was the same with Jewish soldiers. Jewish officers, Jewish soldiers , Jewish doctors were in the concentration camps; they did not forget quickly or at all. I know of many instances where not only did they work in the camps but the ordinary Jewish soldier would write home to his parents, or to his wife, or to his Rabbi in America, telling his experiences in the death camps, and ask for packages to be sent to him, so that he could help in his own individual way the people whom he saw in the camps.
Q: How about your own lasting reaction? The temporary reaction and the lasting reaction to what you saw and to the work with the displaced?
A: Well, my personal reaction to what I saw and what I experienced then, during the immediate days themselves, was that I worked as I had never worked before. It meant working 7 days a week, week after week, and driving yourself to the fullest from early in the morning until late at night when you could no longer stand up. And yet at the same time, there was a sense of exhilaration in that I felt I had never done work as important as this before, and that it was quite likely that I would never be involved in such important work later in my life. I felt that I was able to do something directly, primarily to help my fellow Jews, in terrible circumstances. But then when.at the end of 1945, after 3 1/2 years in Europe, I was ordered back to America, I suffered a letdown, a depression. A depression that manifested itself in several ways. In one way I did not see how I could be a Rabbi again and live a calm and peaceful life, and I was troubled with my theology. I did not know whether I believed in God, whether I thought there could be a God after I had witnessed what I had in the death camps of Europe! And I was quite convinced, as a matter of fact, that I would never again be a Rabbi. In fact, I had promised Edward Warberg who had come to see me while I was working in Frankfurt as General Eisenhower's advisor on Jewish affairs. Mr. Warberg at the time was an officer in the American Army. He had come to see me to ask if I wouldn't accept a position with the Joint Distribution Committee to come back to Germany after I was discharged and to take over the position of head of JDC operations in Germany. And I told him that I would. My reaction showed itself in another way. I was angry. I was angry at American Jews. My anger was not sober or calm or rational, but I was angry because American Jews were well off throughout the war, were not touched by the war -- thank God they weren’t -- and here were my fellow Jews whom I had seen in the death camps, who had gone through hell. Moreover, I felt that American Jews weren't doing enough, even now, to help the survivors. And so when I was asked to go on a speaking tour for the United Jewish Appeal for the next year and half, and when Mr. Warberg not only released me from my promise to the J D C, but urged that I go on the speaking tour to raise money for the Jews of Europe, I accepted the invitation and I expressed my rage and my anger at the American Jews in the addresses that I made for the U JA. But, oddly enough, the addresses filled with fury succeeded in raising large sums of money for the Jews of Europe. And after I’d completed a year and a half for the U J A in America, they sent me to South Africa for four months of similar fundraising in South Africa in what is today called Zimbabwe and Zambia so that my hostility was expressed through activity raising funds for the Jews still left in the Displaced Persons camps.
Q: Well, that’s such a wonder ful way of working out an anger and placing it and putting it to work. What about the belief in God that the prisoners retained? Were you u in touch with people who said “I stopped believing in God” or “I never stopped believing in God. ?
A: I met both kinds of people in the camps. There were those who remained observant and pious Jews throughout all of their ghastly experiences and who, when I first met them, asked me for copies of religious books. For books from which to pray and books from which to study. That was what they wanted first and most, even more than food or clothing or heat in their shelters. On the other hand, there were Jews who, if they had ever had believed, now no longer believed. They were concerned about the physical things and also about cultural things, about organizing an orchestra, or creating a library. They wanted nothing to do with religion or with religious Jews. They tolerated me as a rabbi, because to them, I came not as a rabbi, but as an American Army officer, who had entrée to Eisenhower. And yet, no one could judge them, no one could fault them. Who can judge people who had gone through the hell that they had?
Q: How did these experiences affect your future life, not only as a rabbi, but your political views on the Middle East, on Viet Nam, on civil rights? How much did these experiences influence you, or change your thinking, from what it had been before?
A: I am not sure that it had a major effect with regard to changing my thinking. It isn’t that I was conservative before and became liberal afterwards. I was a strong and ardent Zionist before. I was what is described as liberal in American politics before. And after the experiences my Zionism became all the stronger, and the need for a Jewish homeland became much more clarified. And as far as my political point of view is concerned, I saw even better than I had seen before the need for fostering better relations among men generally, among peoples, among nations, and throughout all of humanity. I saw the need, too, for trying to fashion a more just world and a more compassionate world.
Q: One more question that I will sort of throw a few things into. What, in your opinion, are the good ways of making sure that it won't happen again? I mean shows like the “Holocaust” T.V. show, teaching in private schools rather than public schools. In politics. What are the ways which you recommend that we can work in? A: Well, first of all, the memory of the Holocaust must never be permitted to grow dim. We live today in a world where for perhaps the majority of the people living today the Holocaust is something that happened in history, something that occurred before they were born or before they had any consciousness of what was happening in a foreign country. So, that today, for most people living, the Holocaust is past history and is lumped together in a category with pogroms and with oppression of non-Jews, and persecution of people generally. The Holocaust was unique in human annals, and the memory of it must be kept fresh, as something the like of which never happened before, and something whose memory should scare us sufficiently so that we must be on the alert that nothing like it should happen again. That means that every means, every opportunity of bringing it to the informed opinion of people everywhere should be utilized. The media generally, the press, and journals, and lectures and conferences, the more the better. We must be on the alert to those who deny that the Holocaust ever happened. To the so-called historians who write that it is something manufactured by Jews, we must be not only alert but belligerent in fighting, and we must constantly be on guard to crush any kind of anti- Semitism or racism or prejudice or hatred against Jews or against any segment of the world’s population. For, we have learned that hatred is contagious, and that it jumps, it leaps from one victim to another victim and that it infects the haters so that the haters multiply in number. And so now in our lifetime and the lifetime of our children and I dare say for generations yet unborn the battle must be continued.
Q: All I can say at this point is thank you. Thank you very very much. This will be a very valuable addition. This interview is now finished.
.
[Tape ends on that side. Conversation resumes as follows on other side of tape]
Q: Did you actually have nightmares too and what, if anything, did you do about it?
A: I had nightmares, not only during the time that I served in Europe, but for a good number of years afterwards. I can't say that I woke screaming, but I remembered vividly in these nightmares the gas chambers, the crematoria, the sacks of human ash stamped as “Fertilizer”, and many other recollections of the concentration camps in Germany and in Austria came to my mind while I slept. I was indeed very miserable, very unhappy, and was very relieved when I woke up.
And for years afterwards, such nightmares became less and less frequent. Yet, they occurred, and even to this day, periodically, I get some kind of flashback during a dream. I did nothing about it from the point of view of seeking out professional advice. Like the subject of many nightmares, I hoped that it would disappear. I am not given to nightmares generally, and am pretty healthy that way, so I hoped that they would disappear, and for the most part they have.
Q Have you ever counseled congregants who did have these after-effects of the traumatic experience of surviving the Holocaust or having been closely related to somebody who did?
A: I have counseled survivors and I have discussed their problems with children of survivors. Each one, of course, is different. Each one's experiences is different and each one's reactions are different. But, I have tried to be of whatever help I can to such people.
Q: Have you made friends among the non-Jewish personnel in the Army? And was this friendship based on the common goal of helping the Jewish survivors?
A I made friends particularly with two groups of people. One with Christian chaplains, particularly those who shared our offices at headquarters. They were not involved in helping the Jewish survivors. As a matter of fact, the Theater Chaplain, my superior, a Roman Catholic Monsignor, was very angry at the fact that General Eisenhower had appointed me his advisor on Jewish affairs. He reproached me although he knew that he could do nothing about it. He reproached me and he said why shouldn't there be a Catholic advisor, why shouldn't there be a Baptist advisor and so on? The old problem of not being able to recognize the fact that Jews are not only a religion but a people as well. The second group of people with whom I became friendly were those who worked at the headquarters of the Displaced Persons executive and of civil government for General Eisenhower's headquarters in Frankfurt. And for those people, of course, our interests in common had to do with the plight of the displaced persons and what could be done to help them.
Q Thank you very much.
