Klara Lee INTV Okay. We're going to talk a little bit about your experiences as a young girl, and I guess the first question that I wanted to ask you, Kay, is what memories you have growing up in Vienna, before any of this happened.
00:00:33 Yeah. I understand. Uh, I was an only child, and I had very loving parents, and we had a very, very nice life in Vienna. Uh, my family was Orthodox, and religion was a large part of our life. Uh, my parents were very good to me, and I was very spoiled, being an only child, and my memories of before are that, that I was...I was very happy. [clears throat] Is that gonna wreck everybody? Okay. Uh, I was a very happy child. I had n-, parents, I had friends, I had family, and, uh, we l-, we had a var-, my parents, my fa-, my...my, uh, father and his, um, brother-in-law – have to make sure the relationship is correct – ran a factory like, uh, um, paper factory, like Zellerbach and some of those, and so we were well-to-do, and that's all I.. . I remember. I only remember good things, uh, about that previous life in Vienna, uh, and right now I'm trying to recall anything that I felt as a child, uh, would disturb me, and I can't think of anything that.... I was really just a very normal, happy, uh, child, with a good family.
You said that you grew up in an Orthodox household. Tell me a little bit about where your family came from, because they didn't start out in Vienna.
00:02:17 Right. My [clears throat], my father's family, um, he...he was born in Poland, and he came to Vienna to come to the wedding of my mother's sister. Of course, at that time, uh, [laughs] she wasn't my mother. But he came to...to be an usher at the wedding of...of, uh, my mother's sister, and he came in a way to find a.. . a.. . a wife, too, you know, bec-, so that was the first time he came to Vienna. He stayed for the wedding, and that's where he met my mother. My mother was, um, [chuckles] she was a really, uh, I don't know, I.. . I can't express the word, but she and my grandmother didn't exactly get along tiptop. My mother was, liked to go to dances, and she liked to do this and she liked to do that, whereas her sister, my aunt, liked to read books, and my grandmother ran this [chuckles] store in her apartment, so, uh, my mother ended up doing the housework usually [clears throat]. And when my father came the first time to meet my, uh, the bridegroom's family, my mother was on her floor w-, scrubbing the floor. And he said when he came to Austria there were so many nice Jewish mothers who were interested [laughs] in getting him for a son-in-law, he was the, she was the first woman he ever met that wasn't full of makeup and all gussied up because she was on the floor, scrubbing the floor. So he, that was always a story that I enjoyed hearing about, and it was, really my mother and father were really a match, which was unusual in Orthodox Jewish families because there was a lot of pressure to get married at a certain time and so on, but my father never went back to Poland. He stayed in Vienna, and, uh, that was the beginning of, uh, me [laughs], sort of. [laughs] As a young girl in Vienna, do you have memories of going to synagogue and participating?
00:04:33 Yes. Uh, my father, um, went mostly to synagogue. My mother and I many, like for the high holidays she would be home preparing the dinner, and he would go to temple, uh, the night before Rosh Hashanah, whereas here everyone goes the night before, but we always kept the two days of the holidays strictly, strictly, and all my mother and father's friends were people like them who were Orthodox and who kept the holidays in...in that manner, so we didn't think it was anything unusual. I didn't, I thought all the Jewish kids had families like that, uh, and so we were a Jewish community, really, but I was not ever a great temple-goer, and they didn't insist that I go, uh, you know, if I didn't want.
What kinds of memories do you have of things in Vienna beginning to change for the worse in terms of being Jewish?
00:05:42 Well, I started in the schools in Vienna. You know, I went to a public school, and religion was not, like in this country, religion was part of the curriculum of the school, and as things got a little tough was when, uh, we used to go to study Hebrew, the Jewish children, and then the Christians would go and study their holidays, less and less time was spent on the emphasis on teaching us Hebrew or separating us to, you know, in getting a Jewish sense of life and all that, that I remember as changing in the public school. I think that's the first thing I.... Uh, the...the other thing was, of course, once, uh, Hitler, um, came, the Jews, of course, were, that, that was...that was when it really started. My mother couldn't buy fruit for her family because Jews weren't allowed to eat fruit. Uh, things like that started popping up, whereas, uh, uh, before, of course, we were part of the...the gentile community as well. So I think that's the first I remember that things were starting to change.
Let's see. You were born in 19...
30.
...30, so you're still a young girl, five, six, seven years old when things are beginning to change for the worse.
00:07:17 I would say seven, 'bout, when I was about seven years old, because when I was eight, I already was going to the [chuckles] United States, so....
Prior to that – we'll get to that in a second --
Yeah.
– I'm still interested if you have any specific memories of anything particular happening to you.
00:07:42 Uh, um, no. The, I.. . I really can't. I think my mother and father were trying to shield me as much as possible from the things. The first thing was the fact that, as I told you, my father had this factory and, um, [sighs] that was the first thing to be taken away from us, and then came our...our home and so on, so eventually – it was a slow process. It wasn't like overnight I realized that something terrible was going to happen, because it took me – you know, I was only a child – to...to realize my fa-, my...my life was going to change as drastically as it did, uh, but things were s-, w-, w-, you know, they were just different. They started to be different, a difference which made all of us very uneasy, my parents [chuckles], too, everyone, you know. We realized what was coming so, but I was o-, I was only a child, really, so my memory of that is a little w-, vague.
Now the focus of this film, of course, is on this episode where the 50 children, of which you were one, left Vienna, and obviously I'm quite interested, recognizing again how young you were, but let's talk a little bit about the memories that you have, whether they are memories of your parents discussing the possibility of you leaving . . .tell me a little bit about what you remember.
00:09:19 Well, um, my father read the newspaper, in the newspaper that this was going to come about, that there were people who were coming from the United States to rescue 50 children, and I h-, I was just getting over the measles, and my mother said, or my father said to her, “I think you should have her go and see if...if she could be one of the 50,” and my mother said, “No, she's still ill from the measles, and I can't let her go,” and my father said, “Yes, you are, because we may die here.” This was already a time when this was sort of imminent. “We'll die here, but she's not gonna die. She's gonna go and...and lead a.. . a life in...in America.”
00:10:09 And so I went, and I took a, the test, a big test [chuckles] that they asked us to do was to count back from then, which at eight, believe me, I could do, and I was the 50th child chosen. So it was my dad who really, really, really decided that that's the way it was going to be and my mother went along with him. So that was my...my first experience of realizing that I was going to have to leave them and they were going to have to leave me. In the meantime, my father went to...to England, and so he was not there when I left. It was just my mother saying goodbye, and that was pretty tough. I was only a little girl going, you know, eight years old, going for the first time in my life on a – you can call it an adventure; I didn't know what it was gonna be all about, so that was...that was the beginning.
So in between the time that your parents first learned about the possibility of you being one of the 50, and when you left, we're only talking about a matter of several weeks. Your father had already left for England?
00:11:22 Yeah, well, yeah, well, he...he was, he was set to go to England before we realized this, these...these people were coming to...to get the children, so he...he had left. I think it was more than that, but I'm not absolutely sure because I.. . I can't quite remember. Uh, my mother managed to get a job as a domestic in England in the meantime as well, so, um, there was no turning back as far as my going. They accepted me to go with them, and my parents then were, had the opportunity both at different times to escape from Vienna to England.
00:12:03 So, uh, um, the first thing I can remember is that we all sent to Berlin to get the ship to take...to take us to, you know, and this was the first time I ever came in contact with the other 49 children, really, um, and I was very shy. I was a very shy child. Hard to believe [chuckles]. I was a very sh-, and so, um, they had, uh, booked a, uh, a.. . a place for us to sleep overnight so that we can go on the boat the next day, and I was too timid to – a lot of the children just ran to a bed that was available, you know, but I was too timid to do that, so I, and I think there were two other children, or three other children, were put in a separate room, and I'll always remember that. I was very, very, very lonely and upset there. But as we got on the ship together, things became actually better in a way, because by that time I had seen some of the faces before and I was not quite as timid.
Let's back up a second before we get to the ship...
Mm-hmm.
...'cause I still want to stay focused for a little bit on family life in Vienna...
Mm-hmm.
...again, recognizing that you were young and we're talking about a long time ago. Here you're a young girl. You're about to leave; your father has already left. Do you have any memories of your father actually leaving?
00:13:38 You know, I don't think I have. I must have, uh, there...there must have been a very traumatic goodbye, but I.. . I.. . I.. . I can't remember it. I really can't.
And along the same lines, what, if any, kinds of memories do you have of you and your mother as you as an eight year old were also preparing to leave Vienna?
00:14:07 Well, uh, I.. . I.. . I.. . I really vaguely remember my mother mentioning the fact that she would go, she would also be leaving, so that she wouldn't be left in Vienna alone. Um, other than that, uh, my mother made this coat and hat that you see in the picture, which was a big deal, and she went and she actually used all her stamps to buy me an apple. Somehow she managed to do that. As I told you, Jews weren't supposed to eat fruit. A-, so she had the, I had the coat and...and the hat, and the apple.
00:14:46 I hung on to that apple. I finally had to throw it overboard on the ship, because I.. . I.. . I w-, didn't wanted to eat it, I didn't know, you know, that it was, this was just a precious thing that she did for me. And the hat and the coat was the same thing. That's why I recognize myself aboard the ship, 'cause I recogni-, it was royal blue, I always remember, the hat and coat. Um, I tried to be brave, too. I remem-, you know, I didn't wanna cry, I can't go, I don't wanna go. I don't remember doing that. I just took it for what it was, and that was it. She always promised me we would see each other again, you see. That was, of course, the hope of all the children, I suppose, um, but I really, I don't...I don't remember that much of it right now. Tha-, tha-, it was pretty...it was pretty, pretty dramatic, I'm sure [chuckles], but I.. . I played the game, I think, properly, without trying to make them more miserable, yeah.
You talked before about having a couple of cousins...
Mm-hmm, that's right.
...so tell me a little bit about them and why they did not get to go....
00:16:03 Okay. They, um, my, I.. . I, I'm sure that my father probably called...called my aunt, uh, to tell 'em about this, and, uh, said that I was going to go and get interviewed to see if I could, if they would take me. Uh, my aunt refused to...to...to take her childre-, take my two cousins to be even interviewed. She said, “No, I'm staying, my children are staying with me.” Now her husband, which is my uncle, went with my father to England, so she was alone in Austria with the two of them, but she refused to let them go. Ca-, well, my youngest, my...my young, younger cousin is a year younger than me and my older cousin is only three months older than me, so we were all exactly the same age, but no, she wouldn't, she wouldn't go for it. She wouldn't. She refused. That's why they stayed, and I.. . I went. So they saw a little bit more of it than I did. After I left, and my mother left – I think she was gone, too, but I'm not sure about that – uh, the SS came and picked my grandfather up, and he never survived the concentration camp. So, um, at the end of it, my...my aunt and my two cousins eventually did come to the United States, but much later than I did, with my grandmother. So, uh, uh, but that was later on, of course. It was later on.
And so the cousins who stayed behind with your aunt, how long did they stay in Vienna?
00:17:43 Well, I ca-, I, you see, I was na-, I was born in August, I was nine in August, and we left in June. They must have come at least six months after I.. . I went. I'm not...I'm not absolutely sure of the exact date, but they came that much later, uh, than I did. I, of course, stayed with my sponsor, uh, and they, when they came, uh, uh, they...they lived in Brooklyn. I think I told you this story before, I don't know if you wanna hear it again, but anyway, and I, when, once they came, they were my family. I used to take a bus, a train, and everything else just to go to...to, uh, Brooklyn. And we all slept in one huge bed, and I was so happy, you know, this was my family. I.. . I felt more at home there than I did with my great-uncle, who was my grandfather's age, uh, so it was a momentous moment when they came.
And once again, before we leave Vienna, do you have any memory of either the Krauses or the doctor who was with them?
00:18:53 Well, the doctor was, uh, first of all, uh, the doctor interviewed, in fact, me, because I was just over the measles. And than I don't know who e-, who asked me about the [chuckles], to go back from ten. I don't know whether that was, uh, uh, uh, the Krauses or...or that, I really don't, I don't reme-, I don't remember that much about that. All I remember is that they notified us that I was acc-, that I was going, I was accepted to go, and I remember the one to ten [laughs], of course, as being, you know, uh, the test that they gave me to see if I was intelligent [laughs].
[logistics] There's some sort of...
Yeah, that's.... Oh, dear. You know, if you close the door, this door here and the door to the family room, I don't think you'll hear it.
Yeah.
You're not gonna be able to unplug that either. It's plugged in the back of the refrigerator and you can't get to it. I forgot all about that refrigerator. Can you delete it?
[inaudible] See, I didn't even he-, you see, I wasn't...I wasn't...I wasn't even aware that that had come on. I'm so used...used to it. I'm sor-, but if you would close that door, you can close this door, you can close the door to the family room, and the door right here, so all three doors can be closed if you, and that should take it away, I think.
[logistics] Were you able to turn it off?
Yeah.
Oh, good for you.
[inaudible] Oh, good. I didn't realize that. Let's not talk too long, or my ice cream's gonna melt.
[laughter] That wouldn't be too good, would it? [chuckles] I promise you, we won't be talking long enough...
[laughs] That's good. Glad to hear that.
[inaudible] Well, there's a thought. Absolutely.
Yeah.
Yeah, that's fine. Isn't it interes-, see, I.. . I didn't even hear that. I'm so used to hearing these noises that...that, uh, you know. You should be at my house sometime when the...the chipmunks go from the tree to the roof in the middle of the night....
[logistics] Okay. So we were talking about the memories, however vague they are of counting backwards to ten. I can't imagine....
00:21:57 I don't either, uh, but I seem to remember it. It may be one t-, I think it was one to ten. It was something so beneath my [laughs], beneath me that I, you know, but, you know, I don't think they were looking for brilliant children. They were just looking for healthy children who were able to, you know, do you know what I'm saying? Uh, at least, I don't know, maybe your wife would know more about that. I have no idea. Uh, in other words, you don't have to be brilliant to be taken and rescued. I'm, I am surprised about the brothers and sisters. I never realized that either, that there was so many brothers and sisters, or brothers and brothers. That's interesting.
As your parents prepared for you to leave, and you were getting ready to go to this unknown place, do you remember knowing anything at all about the United States?
00:23:09 No. Nothing about it. Uh I was somewhat t-, uh, um, because I was going to a relative, my great-uncle, and then Louis, you know, the fellow who wrote me that telegram, I was comforted by the fact that I might be close to...to...to somebody. In other words, I wasn't being sent into the diaspora with, not knowing anybody. I know a lot of, maybe some of the children were sent to pla-, people who were happy to have 'em, but were no relation. I had a relation. Uh, although I had never met this uncle, great-uncle, uh, I felt that...that, you know, so I felt a little better about going there, because I knew that's where I would end up eventually, so I wasn't...I wasn't, th-, that didn't come into my mind too much.
And, Kay, do you remember any of the details about leaving Vienna, including getting on a train...?
00:24:30 Yeah, well, we got, I remember but vaguely on the train. The first remember I have, uh, was being put into this sleeping s-, to sleep overnight, and, uh, I don't remember getting on the ship per se, but I re-, remember that I was on the ship with other children that I had gotten, some of them that I had gotten to know, and particularly the girls, uh, and that I was not unhappy, uh, on the ship. I can't remember being unhappy, mainly because I was surrounded by others like me, I think, but I.. . I wasn't unhappy aboard the ship. I really wasn't. I was more apprehensive about getting off the ship, uh, particularly when they said we were going to a camp, and a camp did not, I didn't know what a camp was in the United States [chuckles] in comparison to a camp where I'd just been, so, uh, I don't know who I asked, but I remember asking someone, “What kind of a camp are we going to?” because that...that, I think must have frightened me somewhat, and, of course, when we got there, it was obvious that, uh, it was going to be a happy exp-, and it was a happy...happy experience.
On the ship, and the journey was probably about ten days...
Ten days, yeah. Imagine.
...what sticks out in your mind?
00:25:35 Not anything at all. Abs-, really. I was just, uh, we...we, I think we played games. Uh, I remember that, uh, we had to eat meals at a certain time, but not really. I just don't have any great memories abou- – I wasn't seasick or anything, either. Uh, I was just, it was just, n-, n-, not at all did I have anything bad to remember about it, just.... I've been on cruises since then and it wasn't that much different [laughs], I didn't think at the time [sniffs].
Well, an eight year old being on a.. .
A.. . a cruise ship, which should have been a good adventure, but I.. . I think I was taking it in my stride, I guess I would say.
Some of the other kids we talked to remembered things like eating strange food...
Mm-hmm.
[inaudible]
Really?
...in Vienna.
No, I don't, I....
Jello....
00:26:37 [laughs] You know, vaguely I do remember a lot of talk about jello [chuckles] in...in Vienna. No, I, you know, also I got used to not eating certain foods 'cause they were not available to us, so, as I say, fruit was one of them, and I do remember that I was kind of, I.. . I liked the fruit. I mean, I.. . I was, you know, the apple went overboard but I.. . I really did.... That was one thing I do remember vaguely, that I was, I enjoyed the, uh, not necessarily food food, but don't forget, I was kosher all my life as well [chuckles], so I don't know what, whether it was kosher on the boat or not. I doubt it, right? Um, but, uh, uh, no, I don't remember having any problems like that, no. But I do, no, when you mentioned jello, it did sorta ring a bell [laughs].
Well, a funny story that one fellow told me about jello is that they served jello, and some of us grew up eating with fruit inside...
W-, yeah, sure.
...and he thought the jello was some sort of preserve, just preserving the fruit, so he scraped away all the jello in order to get...
To the fruit?
...to the bananas inside the jello.
Oh, that's interesting. I don't think my mother was, made, uh, my mother was an excellent cook and baker, that she made jello [laughs]. I don't remember that.
Now you mentioned, Kay, the summer camp outside of Philadelphia.
Mm-hmm.
This was in Collegeville, Pennsylvania.
Mm-hmm.
Tell me a little bit about that.
00:28:19 Again, I just [sighs], I.. . I don't have any outstanding memories, except that I had to learn English, and so we had to go to class, and I remember that, but I was more than willing because I understood that, uh, the people I was going to were going to speak English and a little bit of Yiddish, but that's, German was out. Um, I.. . I think I was...I was quite content there again. I.. . I just realized, uh, that we weren't gonna be there that, we were only there two...two months or so, something like that, um, that I was going to go into another place that, this place that I was gonna be there for possibly a long time, so I don't remember anything that significant in the camp, except that I had to learn English, so we had English cour-, English classes every day and so on, uh, but that, that's, uh, it was, I, again, I felt it was...it was okay, it was a good experi-, it wasn't a good experience, but it was all right, I was, uh, I was again thinking ahead of going to my great-uncle, uh, um, and I think that's what...what was my goal. One, I know once I went there, I would stay there until my parents could come, so.... And I think that was comforting to me, knowing that I was going, you know.
Now speaking of your parents, do you remember whether you were able to communicate via letter or...?
00:29:51 Yes, I was going to mention that. I could communicate with them. My mother wrote me, my father was able to write me, and I was able to write them as well, uh, which was also very comforting, knowing that I was in contact. And, as a matter of fact, before they finally got the final okay that they were going to come, uh, I think I got a telegram from bo-, from my mother, saying we're...we're actually going to go to the boat and come home, and come back...come back to you. So I do remember that, yeah. But we did keep in touch, in other words, yes. Yeah.
And, of course, they were both in England...
Right.
...correct?
00:30:31 But they were both in England, but not the same place. My father was in a place called Kitchiner Camp, where there were a lot of immigrants, men only, and my mother was a domestic in a Jewish household. And, uh, later on I found out that there were, uh, my mother-in-law, they were also in England at that time, uh, had a Jewish lady from Europe, uh, that she took in until her fa-, she could get together with her family.
And do you recall how long after your arrival in the United States that it was that your parents arrived as well?
00:31:20 [sighs] I know...I know that I was, I'm trying to think, I was nine years old in August, and I believe they, I think they, maybe the following year sometime. I know I.. . I, was, uh, uh, I was, I couldn't have been much more than nine when we left New York. Our relatives were very kind in giving us the affidavit to make it possible for us to come, but I could hardly wait to see the back of my great-uncle and his wife. I was an eight-year-old, nine-year-old child and they were six, near sixties, or even older. In retrospect I'm sorry I felt like that, but then I was only a child. I was not happy there at all. I was not happy there at all. So, um, it's kind of a memory that I have, you know, I.. . I know I wasn't happy, I know that, so I was so glad to know my parents were coming, and [clears throat] this uncle that you have a picture of us of mine, he was here in California, because his wife got an affidavit from her family that lived in Oakland, so they...they stopped, they lived in San Francisco, and so we decided we would like to u-, unite the family again.
00:32:41 Uh, our relatives in New York were delighted that we were going, uh, because, um, uh, they didn't understand, you know. They...they were born Americans, they lived in America, they were very, very well-to-do people, so they gave us nine dollars and a bus trip, and we went to San Francisco. Uh, now again, in retrospect, I have...I have to thank them for what they did for us, that we were all able to be together and all that, but as a kid, I had enough. And they had enough of me [laughs], too, actually. I mean, I'm putting myself in their place now. If somebody called me and said, “We need you to take our child at eight years old right now,” it would be hard for me, and so retrospectively again I apologize for that, but I was ready to go with my parents the way I was used to.
In the meantime, you spent about a year in school in Brooklyn?
00:33:51 I would say around that. Maybe a little less, it might.... I was very fortunate. There was a family who had escaped from A-, Vienna before all this started, smart people, but they spoke German at home, so their daughter was in my class when I.... First day I went to school, the schoolteacher I had knew one word in German, which was a pen-, what a pencil was in German, and that's it. She sat me near this girl, and we, she and me became tight friends because I could speak to her in German, and she could tell me what was going on in English, and that's how I learned the language, which was just a, you know how things happen, very, you know, uh, it, so that was very fortunate for me that I.. . I really learned English. And then also I loved their, her parents, because they were more like my parents rather than where I was living, so it was very, very fortuitous in all directions.
Did you stay in touch with them?
I haven't, funny enough. When we left, uh, I said, “We'll write.” You know how you go oh, uh, we'll, uh, I'm sure we'll write, we'll see each other again, but we never...we never did, yeah.
And do you have any memories of being reunited with your parents?
00:35:14 Oh, yeah. Well, oh, yeah, when we all went down to the boat, my mother was seasick when the...the...the ship was still in the harbor and [laughs] so she didn't have a very good trip, but it's just the idea that.... First of all, I had grown, and it...it...it, you know, it was...it was a.. . a, um, what can I say, uh, probably the best day of my life since I had left them, seriously. Although I.. . I was not that unhappy all the time, but it, there they were and here I was and that was it. So, and of course, my cousins and my aunt and my uncle were also, we all went together on the bus out here, and my grandmother, so we were really, except for my grandfather, um, united, which was a wonderful thing for us. Uh, my father lost all his family in Poland, so we didn't know what happened to them at all. But, um, that was beyond my kin. I mean, I just knew that my mother was here, my father was, my aunt and my cousins. We were like sisters; we still are [laughs]. One of them lives in Millbrae. Uh, that...that, how...how joyous that must have been for all of us, because my uncle came with my mother and father at the same time, so it really worked out, as I say, and we were very fortunate, I think.
And at the time the immediate family was reunited, what kind of talk was there of the life back in Vienna.
00:36:54 Um, I'm trying to, y-, my, this uncle of mine got us a duple-, a top of a duplex, you know. We all lived together in the Mission District [laughs], uh, for a.. . a couple of years, together, a-, it, they would, I think, I can't remember specifically, but we spoke Yiddish at home, which was, you know, uh, and my grandmother, of course, was living with us as well. Uh, I think they would, they...they talked about it, but they...they had to get over it, too. In other words, when my dad and my mother came here, my dad had to find work. Luckily he was in England, so he did learn some English and so on, and he got in touch with the, uh, Jewish Family Services and so on. I mean, he...he did all kinds of jobs. My fa-, my father was, you know, kosher wine has to be okayed by somebody, so he was the rabbi that went up and he just stayed there for months, uh, making sure the wine was kosher. On the other hand, he...he would, uh, he became a.. . a pin boy in a bowling alley. Anything to make – my mother also became a domestic here for a while as well, so we were all busy, and it was a life we were living now. We had to, my father and mother had to consider now, and ye-, then my cousin Charles, the one I was telling you about, uh, we found out, we didn't know where, what happened to him at all, and we found out he was a lieutenant in the Army, United States Army, and we brought him over then as well, so we had another addition to the family, so those were really good years together. Uh, then my da-, my mother and dad bought a home, and...and their mother and father bought a home, s-, and so we kinda separated, but while we were together, it was, we got along great. We...we were, we were the, a hap-, we were a really good family, we were a happy family.
So it really was a little bit of Vienna.
00:39:05 Absolutely [laughs]. There you go. There you go. Abs-, you, very well put, yes, that's right. We just literally picked ourselves all together, except, as I say, for my grandfather, and lived together, uh, and, you know, I s-, I slept with my two cousins in...in one bedroom, and, I mean, it was just.... Yeah. It was good. We kept the holidays together. We joined the temple on 19th Street, which you may be familiar rel-, even today exists, uh, the only temple in San Francisco that has as mikvah [laughs]. True, it's true, but that was our temple, and my cousin who lives in Millbrae is married to a.. . a man that she met at the temple after we joined the temple, when we were all living on Valencia Street. So everything goes around and around, doesn't it? [chuckles] Kay, as you grew older and [inaudible] in the Bay Area...
Uh-huh.
...the war obviously was going on...
Yes. Well, Japan is where, you know, we were '30, thirty-ni-, we came in '39, and then, of course, '41 was Pearl Harbor.
I'm just interested in what your recollections were of, as you got older, learning and knowing more about what was happening...
In the world, you mean?
...in the world, and in Europe in particular.
00:40:40 Uh, I'm trying to think. The Mission District was not a great place for – I mean, I think we were one of the few, in Mission High School there were three Jewish kids, and guess who they were. The rest was...was, uh, were...were, uh, gentile, um, um, Chicano, it was that kind of a neighborhood, so [sighs], I, we were happy there. I.. . I d-, I don't, I.. . I don't know. I.. . I just feel that, um, we all felt it was a correct move for us, and once I got esta-, you know, I spoke English and I went...went to a school where I got some friends and so on, uh, it was...it was...it was okay, it was fine, it was just, it wasn't that much different from when I, where I had and when I'd grown up. I mean, it was much different than Vienna, obviously, but...but, what I really needed most, I had, which was my parents and my cousins and my uncle. I mean, it was just, uh, we were a family and we continued to be a family, and it was, I, my memories were all good, really. Uh, when we got, when we first got here to California, we were, you know, a little, um, disoriented as to the difference between our life in Vienna and here, obviously, but we...we managed, we di-, we did, and my uncle and my fa-, and my father, uh, went into business together, and all...all kinds of things, the way it was before, do you know what I'm saying, we sort of, like you say, we picked up and here we are.
00:42:23 I knew nothing about the United States until I was, started going to school, into the, but my grandmother, we all became citizens, but my grandmother was the one who, she, I think I told you the story about how she learned to talk English. She went to the movies, the old-fashioned movies that started at ten o'clock in the morning and ended eleven o'clock at night, and she'd just go there and sit there all day Sunday and watch 'em o-, you know, keep, you had, you were able to watch them over and over and over again without having to leave, and there she would sit and then she would come home eleven o'clock at night, and that's how she, and then she started to learn her, uh, the history of the United States, and, I mean, she really studied. I mean, it was, and when she got to the examiner, um, he wanted to go easy on her because she was an elderly person, and he asked the simplest things like who was the first president of the United States, and...and all that, and a couple of other silly questions, and she said, “Excuse me,” she said, “is that all? Don't you wanna know anything about the Constitution?” [laughs], which I thought was fa-.... She was that kind of a lady, as I explained to you. So, um, it...it, and we ha-, we had a good, we...we had a good life. I mean, I, it was hard at first, but...but we managed to get...get over it. I mean, she did funny things, too, but I don't wanna go into my grandmother [laughs], what she did, these things, anyway [chuckles].
[logistics] Oh, yeah, I'm afraid the gone has, the sun has gone bye-bye, hasn't it?
[logistics] You know, I don't mean to...to give you the impression that this was such a happy adventure. I hope I'm not doing that.
No, no.
Because it was tough, I mean, but...but the important things were in place.
Sure.
You know, I mean, it wasn't...it wasn't a picnic or anything, but, uh, as I say, the most important things were in place. We...we were a family.
[inaudible]
00:44:56 After losing everybody on my dad's side and all that, it's just.... I.. . I, that's why I say I'm really one of the...the peoples that thank God I don't have a concentration camp to remember, and, although my dad was picked up, but he got away, uh, things like that. That was, but that...that was past. We were now living in...in one, my mother and my father were ba-, we all became citizens, cause I.. . I came, became a citizen 'cause they were, but, uh, things like that, so I.. . I have no complaints when I look back on my life. Uh, it was different from what I probably would have ec-, would...would have happened if I stayed in, grew up in Vienna, but...but it was good, it was okay. It was okay. I'm sure that lots of people can't say that. It would be interesting to know all the people, uh, that you've talked to, how many of them never did see their parents again and all that.
Yeah.
Do you have a few? Uh, do...do...do...?
It's quite something, because it turns out, and I don't have the exact numbers, but a fair number of them had one or both parents survive.
Oh, that's wonderful. I'm glad to hear that.
This particular group of 50 children...
Were lucky, huh?
...were lucky.
Yeah.
The Jewish community in Vienna was lucky in a sense that there was time to leave for many Jewish families...
00:46:45
N-, it was very hard. We d-, we debated going to then Palestine. Couldn't get in. They would have taken us, of course, but you know what happened with emigrants who tried to go to Israel, Palestine. Uh, we could have possibly gone to Shanghai, although we didn't have any connection there, so, the...the people that...that gave us the affidavits, where you had to sign that the government would not be bothered by us and all that, came from my great-uncle's family, and they were well, very well-to-do, which helped a lot to get my parents out of England, and my uncle and my aunt and this kind of thing, so, as I say, in retrospect, I have much more respect than I did [chuckles] when I was a little girl, but I was not happy there, but...but they saved our lives, literally saved our lives, and...and that, so many people never got that chance. So, as I say, I don't wanna paint this beautiful picture, but I feel that I'm very lu-, now, I can say that I feel I was very fortunate.
I'd like to hear a little bit, your father was detained in camp briefly?
00:48:02 Yeah, well, actually my, they picked my...my mother was m-, they took my mother to...to SS headquarters for some reason. They just came into the house and took her, but let her go. And my father also, uh, was picked up, and actually he was put on a train already, but something went awry with the train, and those who jumped and ran, ran, and he did. So that was, again, who's to know? Who's to know why? My grandfather answered the door when...when they came, and he never survived. Uh, it, one can't explain these things even now, what happened to to some. We had some relatives also that came to the United States, uh, also with affidavits, where he saw his children being shot with his wife, and he remarried in the camp, and they both came, and we took care of them, but they were not me or my parents. They really had these horror memories that really w-, w-, was horrendous, and today I understand the children of the Holocaust, people who were in the camps, had a tough life as well when they were growing up in this country, 'cause parents could never forget the horror. So that's why I say I'm fortunate, let's put it that way, I'm fortunate that I didn't have those...those memories. We had them as they came along, but, uh, it wasn't like that, 'cause there's stories of that, millions of stories about that.
No, this is a different story.
00:49:53 Yeah, it...it i-, it is, in the sense that, uh, uh, [sighs], uh, um, my cousin's par-, as I told you, his parents and his sis-, younger sister w-, he doesn't know what happened to them at all. So, uh, those are the, you know, w-, and, uh, he met a girl, he actually met a.. . a girl whose parents were in similar, that he was going to marry but he didn't, but that's another, that's nothing to do with this, so, um, yeah, you can see why I'm, I, what I'm saying to you is that...that I was lucky. I really was. I'm sure you'll hear other stories from other people who were not as fortunate. And as I said, I don't wanna drum up this gorgeous picture, either, but it was okay, I.. . I, we managed to get through it. I had what I needed, I guess that's, was the, you know.... If you asked my mother or my father, they'd probably tell you a different story [laughs].
You've shown me the telegram that you received...
Mm-hmm.
...when you graduated...
High school.
...high school. That suggests that there was some ongoing contact....
00:51:06 Yes, because Louis Levine was a good friend of my great-uncle, and he was one of the financial supporters of the trip, so he knew about me, but I didn't know about him, and when I started, uh, when I, uh, so h-, my great-uncle and...and he were...were in...in correspondence with each other, and so when he found out that I had just graduated with all As and all that, that was, he sent me this telegram, which I thought was very sweet of him, but it was due to the fact that there was a connection there between them, uh, and so on. I did meet him only once, and that was when he came to camp.
What do you remember about him?
00:51:53 Well, uh, uh, the only reason I remember is I remember his name, and he came, and he was looking for me, he came to look for me because he, I was a good, the only child he knew was going to come, and so he introduced himself and he...he...he said, “Oh, you're gonna love it,” it, you know, the usual love it at...at so-and-so's house and all that, so that was the one time I met him, and then we kind of lost track. Now, he may have kept in touch with some of the other...other children. I don't know. So this telegram, and, oh, we, I was so thrilled to hear from him, but I think there was a connection between that and my great-uncle that made...made me, that he, you know, sought me out. I'm sure that he, uh, um, he...he...he was a very, very nice gentleman. He really was a very nice gentleman, so.... But, uh, again, we didn't, I didn't for, while, for the time I was in...in New York, uh, living with my uncle, I didn't see him at all that I remember. But he and my uncle were, you see, were friends.
Yeah, I have to say I don't know a lot about Louis Levine [inaudible].
Yeah, he was very wealthy man, I don't know, I thought he was a banker, somebody told me was a ba-, big, uh, I don't know.
I think some kind of real estate.
Or maybe it was real estate, but he was very well-to-do. My...my great-uncle was a jeweler, dealt in diamonds and things like that – maybe that was their...their connection – and was also very well-to-do, so....
What was the name, do you know?
Weinstock.
Do you remember his first name?
00:53:31 Oh, God, my grandfather's name and his name is...is escaping me, unfortunately, but, uh, I'm tryin' to think. [sighs] You see, these...these two brothers, the great-uncle went to the United States, but my grandfather went to Vienna. Just pure...pure choice, you see. Uh, no, I don't...I don't remember his, but the last name is Wein-, was Weinstock, of course, yeah, which seems to be a kind of common Jewish name here. I don't know, I never realized there were so many Weinstocks [laughs] around, but really, it's true, uh, anyway, uh, um, it's kind of an unusual name, it's, uh, you know, but nay-, but nobody thinks of me as a Lee, either [chuckles]. I wasn't, until I got married.
In San Francisco there are a lot of Lees.
0:54:22 Oh, my grandm-, my mother-in-law was a very British, British lady, believe me, and when she was looking for a place for her family to...to move into, she looked in the paper and they would say, “What's your name?” and she would say, “Elizabeth Lee.” “We don't take Chinese.” Really, and so...so she said, “What are they talking about?” [laughs]. That wasn't my father-in-law's name. He changed his name from Liebler to Lee because of the anti-Semitism in his day. How about that?
And I know that you mentioned that your husband's family came from England.
0:54:57 Yes. My father-in-law, well, my [clears throat], my, um, his oldest daughter used to have these parties for gee-, Jewish, j-, j-, gee-, Jewish soldiers, and my....my, uh, the man she was going to marry came to one of them, and they got married in London and they were gonna stay there, but then he changed his mind. He was from New York. And they came over and so my father-in-law said, “No, we're not breaking up the family,” so all the rest of the bunch came. There were five kids and m-, and mom and dad. And, uh, he gave up his business and everything to...to be here with his family. See how families get into that? Um, and they live in Hillsborough [laughs]. Thought I'd just get you reoriented [laughs]. They're still here and they're still in Hillsborough. Um, uh, but, uh, families meant a lot to them, too, that he said, “No, I'm not leaving, I'm not letting you go to America with your husband and leaving the rest of us here,” so off they went. And everybody's been perfectly happy about it, too. Um, uh, but I don't, I really can't say that I remember a lot of...of things so much before as I do more recently when, after they came here and I m-, met my husba-, and, you know, this kind of thing. My memories, my, I wish you had my cousins here, because they remember everything [laughs].
[inaudible] They were not pa-, they didn't, they, s-, see what happens? See what happens, when she wouldn't, otherwise they would have been able to tell this story to you, too, or...or...or also.
Now, it sounds like – and this isn't a loaded question at all, so I hope it doesn't sound that way – but it sounds like the two people that you really don't really have any memories of are the Krauses.
00:56:52 That's correct. I, absolutely not. I really – and yet I'm sitting next to...next to her, you know, in the picture on the ship. I.. . I really, I know they were nice. That's all I can tell you is they were very nice, they were caring for us and, but that was all of us. Wasn't me parti-, I mean, I just, they were very nice people, but that, but I have to tell you, I don't know if I've told you this, my cousin remembered the Krauses and I didn't. When you first told me Kraus, uh, uh, your, thi-, your story, I told my cousin Fredrika and I said, “Who?” She said, “You mean the Krauses?” I said, “Wait a min-, how do—” She must have remembered that name from way, when they came to Vienna, and I didn't remember them and [laughs] had traveled with them, but she remembered the name Kraus. I said, “No, that wasn't their name,” because I was thinking of Louis as being...as being the one who sponsored all this. So she remem-, but she did remember them.
So as you grew older, then, how did you come to know about this story, or did you know exactly what happened?
00:58:07 Well, we ta-, we were cer-, well, we, as I told you, we had these relatives who were, we rescued from the concentration camps, and they were living here in...in...in San Francisco as well. Um, I, you know, by that time we...we read newspapers of things that had happened, you know, that my parents, I mean, you know, we did talk about it. You had to talk about it because when was the l-, I mean, there are so many awful things going on right now, but when was the last time six million people were.... And, so...so obviously we, and then when the war on Japan started, my father went to work in the shipyard. Unfortunately caused his lung cancer, but, uh, so we were...we were then, by then established San Franciscans, but all I remember basically about WWII in...in...in, this was in the same context, I, I'm more clear about the war on Japan than, of what happened, than of what happened in Europe, uh, because of my age. I just did not comprehend. Uh, I only knew when I was unhappy, you know, and I was not unaware, because my, uh, my, uh, the family that I lived with, you know, even the grand-, great-uncle would talk about it. Of course they would, and...and ask me and so on and so forth, uh, and they also had domestics that were...that were, were working in New York and so on, so, but I don't know, I guess I pushed it from my mind, maybe. I.. . I don't, I don't know. I was frightened all the time, don't misunder-, I was really scared. I was scared to go to school because I was, they, everybody knew we were Jewish, and, uh, there were children there who would harass us and so on and so forth. As I say, I'm not, I'm trying not to...to glean on those things because, but those were there, but as a child I, now I, maybe I don't wanna remember them so much any more.
Did your parents ever go back to visit Vienna?
No. And neither have I. Never had any desire whatsoever. Won't buy a German car, either [laughs]. I don't drive one [laughs]. I don't!
I've got a VW out there.
[laughs]
[laughs]
01:00:40 I don't drive one, but no, I.. . I won't. I just don't. Because not so much of what I suffered as much as the dig-, dignity we lost there, the...the way we were treated horribly. Even...even the nicest people. Now, I think I told you the night that there was this crystal night [sic] in Vienna, and they were looking for all the men, and my uncle, my grandfather, and my father went downstairs in the basement of this one, this apartment where we were all ensconced in a, an apartment that wasn't even as big as this room. The...the people didn't give them away. They saw them go down in the basement in hiding, and they didn't give them away. So there were good people, and th-, you read about them all the time, gentile and so on, who were, but I, those...those are,
01:01:40 Those memories I have, the fright, being frightened all the time, you...you c-, had to wear the Jewish star, and you couldn't walk on the street after a s-, there was a curfew, and, I mean, all this. Yes, it was there, and I.. . I didn't like it, but maybe as a child I said, my mother promised me we'd be together again and in America, in America, and so th-, th-, that was pushed aside for me. It was there, and I was unhappy, uh, some of the time in Vienna, and I knew it was going on. It's not like I was stupid and didn't quite understand, but I had, uh, you know, it's been, I'm eighty years old, for goodness sake [laughs]. Time it went away, and it went away as soon as I saw my parents. I mean, I knew that was the crux. If I didn't...if I didn't know.... If they had not been able to come, I don't know what I would have done, because I was living in an uncomfortable environment, uh, and I don't know what would have happened to me, either. So, but again, uh, I have no answer for that.
And just fill me in briefly, your parents lived until when?
01:03:04 My mother died, uh, ff-, fifty [smacks lips], fifty-two years ago, so [laughs].... My dad died 28 years ago. So they have both been gone a, quite a long time. My father's, uh, cancer came from working in the shipyards, and my mother had cancer that at that time they – they could have done something today, but at the time there was just, there was no use. So, uh, there were two, and of course, n-, of course, my husband took cancer as well, so, um, which had nothing to do with anything else, except that, uh, suddenl-, I mean, our family is somewhat endangered of, I mean, I feel I am, anyway. Um, if it's the one thing that always worries me [laughs], that's what worries most about my health. But, uh, other than that, um, I can only remember them as being what I said. They were wonderful par-, even when I was here in the United States, they were wonderful parents to me.
01:04:17 My father was religious, but he wasn't fanatic, and he would never say, n-.... I.. . I used to, uh, I.. . I lived at home. I didn't live on the campus at Berkeley, so whenever there was anything going on in Berkeley, if it was a Friday night, u-, usually I.. . I would be home Friday night for Shabbat, and I wanted to do that, so he never said, “No, don't go, it isn't....” He always said, “If you wanna go, th-, then you can go ahead and do that.” Um, when my...my son was bar mitzvahed here at Temple Beth Jacob, which is in Redwood City, um, it wa-, and naturally it was a Saturday, he never said anything, ye-, uh, like how am I gonna get him there, maybe he doesn't wanna drive on Shabbas and all. He said, “This is more important.” So I'm not...I'm not [chuckles] that religious any more or anything, but I do remember that I think this was very meaningful to me, that he let me, um, uh, [inaudible] brother's married, uh, to a lady whose parents were really, really, really Orthodox, and when he was courting her, his, her father would never let her pick up the telephone on Shabbat and all this kind of stuff. That never went on in my house. They di-, you know, my father went to temple on...on...on Saturday, his store wasn't open on Saturday, our store wasn't o-, our factory in Vienna wasn't open on Saturday, but that didn't mean that, uh, he didn't know that I talked on the telephone or did what I wanted to do. Nev-, he never shoved it at me so that I resented. My sister-in-law didn't like it and has never forgotten it, so....
I probably just have a couple more questions, but something you said reminded me that I did want to ask you, Kristallnacht in –
Vienna?
...November of 1938, you told me a little bit, but tell me if you have other memories of that particular episode.
01:06:24 Absolutely. A-, again, the fear. We knew it was happening, 'cause, uh, but, uh, we didn't know what to do, but the men finally decided they have to take a chance and go downstairs and hide, and if they were caught, they were caught. So the women were all in the...the apartment alone, and we didn't know until they had gone through the apartments, all the apartments, and there were Jews being herded into trucks and all that, whether our, my...my father, my uncle, or my...or my grandfather were among them until actually they came out. They stayed there most of the night; they came out early in the morning. That's when we that they...they had, that the people in the building had not given them away, because somebody did see them go down into the cellar. So that was the main thing, and we were crowded in this small apartment in fear. If anything, fear was the worst enemy, and the inability to know what to do to save yourself. That was constant. It wasn't sa-,
01:07:41 I was a child and even I sensed that, that my parents didn't know what to do, except again, because of our relatives here in Cal-, in...in America, they were at work, they were at work, and they really literally saved our lives, so, but the fear was there, and the fear was there a long time. Don't misunderstand m-, as well. It wasn't only the apple. I was, uh, frightened a lot, worrying about whether my parents were gonna come, but not...not so much that it...it made my life a horror, but it was difficult as a child. I didn't know if I'd ever see them again, because I was quite aware, when we were all in this little apartment that my parents and my grandfa-, my uncle, everything would be gone. So it was...it was really the fear that was the worst of it, and I think my parents shielded me a lot from that, if they could. This I think I'm [inaudible] that all the parents tried to do, I suppose, you know.
But the, see, people in Vienna and people in Germany were totally different kinds of Jews. The German Jew was a German first, and a Jew later [chuckles]. In Vienna, we were Jews first. And even our language was different. There's the British and the American, right? Go to good old Britain, my mother- and father-in-law spoke British, British English, and their chil-, and me [laughs], I spoke American English, so this was a-, about the same thing. So the people in Germany, even when Hitler was there, was in a little different position than when he added, you know, Vienna to his...to his powers, and I think that they were different kinds of Jews, too. I really do think so. I don't think that they were – of course there were Orthodox Jews in this, my best friend here, uh, came from Germany and her family was very German but very Orth-, I mean, it was possible, but I always figured the Germans were Germans and the Viennese were Viennese, so we were kind of different, and the adva-, and the thing that we had in our Kristallnacht and their Kristallnacht, I think, was also different, you know. So, uh, but not that I was there in Germany at the time, but only from reading about it later on, that they...they were different types of Jew. They were Germans first. They learned.... Hitler went back three generations to find if you're Jewish. You haven't been – they could have been Catholic or anything, and they found them, say no, you [speaks German], through generations you were Jewish, so.... So, uh, um, you know, when you, I.. . I always think when I think of things that have happened in South Africa and all these places, there's lots of places where there...there are terrible things happening to...to children, to adults and all that, but six million? I think it's always the number that...that shocks me so much and, you know, how do you count six million people? He was pretty determined, too, wasn't he?
And finally, Kay, when you think back on this episode that brought you here, these 50 children...
Yeah.
...tiny, tiny number...
Number of kids.
[inaudible] There were others, you know, too. There were also others as well.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
I'm just wondering what of all else, all these years later, sticks out in your mind about that moment in time that brought you here to the United States.
01:11:43 I'll tell you what always strikes me fairly, few times more than I would say the ordinary is I'm a very serious person. Now that's not to say that I.. . I don't, uh, I.. . I don't enjoy myself, or th-, uh, this ki-, but I'm a very serious person. And I think that goes way back, way back to when I was eight years old. Um, when I first told my children this, they know...they know the story, and they want me to write it into something they can tell their children, but anyway, and I would tell them, and the adults that listen to it say, “What, you mean you let,” to my parents, “you let your child go at eight years old to herself to a strange new world, and blah-blah-blah-blah-blah?” They can't somehow put that together. So I.. . I really, uh, I, I'm a very serious person, I really am. And that's because of that, of this experience I've had as a child. Because once my parents were here, uh, that was it, that was, I was set, I -m, they were here. It was before that, and the trip and all that. I.. . I.. . I remember some of it, and some of it I don't, I.. . I admit, but it's made me a very, very per-, uh, person.
I also have to ask you, because I know you made a point of saying early that your mother, perhaps largely because you were sick at the time – I'm gonna guess there were other reasons as well...
She didn't wanna let me go.
Yeah.
Yeah, of course.
Did that ever come up later on in life? Did you ever talk to her about that situation?
01:13:42 No. No. Never. Never. I don't ever remember, uh, uh, or, as I said before, I didn't fight it, either. I didn't s-, you know, [sighs], some, it, when something happened to a child, they would cry, “No, don't go, don't go, don't!” In fact, once they wanted to pick up my aunt and my two cousins that were...were at her skirts and they were crying and they were carrying on. I never blamed my parents for that. I saw it as the move, the sacrifice they made, and I don't know why, again, I'm...I'm a very serious person, I think about these things. Ne-, I never had any doubt that it was as hard for them as it would be for me, although I had no concept of what the future would be for me, but I never, I n-, I.. . I just am, I'm a very serious person. I mean, you know how people play charades? They won't catch me, 'cause it's humiliating. I don-, I.. . I would never b-, be, I.. . I won't, I don't like charades, I don't like particularly, uh, I could never see myself, for instance, uh, being in a school play. I really couldn't. I.. . I just, uh, that I know, because it comes back to me repeatedly. Oftentimes it, my children look at me and they say, “Ma, please,” [laughs] so I know what that means, you see, that I'm taking something a little bit too seriously that they consider not that important, especially the one that says, “Well, you know, Mother....” That's the one that u-, I usually get that from.
01:15:17 But they, and I know that myself. Uh, uh, my friends often say to me, um, “Let's go and do this and that and the other thing,” and I.. . I can't even specify what it was. I like the theater and I like music and stuff like that, but something I really didn't wanna go to, so I'd say, “No, I don't wanna go.” “Oh, come...”, you know, this kind of thing, they could never convince me. It, I think I told you the story of the chocolate. I was, right, that's the same...the same little girl who insisted on having that big box of chocolates when this friend of my father's wanted to buy me a small box of chocolates, is the same person you see sitting in front of you. I am a very serious person, and I know basically [chuckles] what I want [sighs], if I can get away with it [laughs], 'cause I'm an only child. But I'm too old to play those games any more, so I, I'm pretty inde-, I'm pretty independent, and in what...what I think and what I.. . what I do, and, uh, um, that's, and I think that's from my background own-, you know. I could have had a much different life, I'm sure, there, but, uh, that's the way fate is, right? And so here I am. Uh, I hope that people find what I have to say interesting and, or whatever, uh, but, uh, but, uh, I know my limitations, too, so.... [smacks lips] That's it?
Unless there's anything that strikes you that I haven't –
01:17:01 Again, this strike, this happened to strike me just as you were, we were finishing up, that I, uh, am, I have paid my dues as well for some of this things that...that have happened to me in my youth. On the other hand, I'm grateful. I'm re- I'm really grateful the way it turned out, uh, uh, and I think that it's the only...the only thing you can do, really. It's the same as when I lost my husband. I, what can you do about that? It's a loss, and I've tried to live my life the way I wanna live my life, uh, despite that he's gone...gone from me and so on. So, uh, even though I can have, you know, get acquainted with...with, uh, uh, I.. . I have lots of friends who are also widows, and they usually have a boyfriend and so on, and I think it's ridiculous [laughs]. You see, that's me! I just, I wouldn't say that, but I.. . I think it's, when somebody my age is looking for a man, I mean, I think it's ridiculous, so [laughs] that's it. That's me [smacks lips], such as I am.
Well, all right. Well, thank you very much.
Thank you for coming, and thank you for the patience to listen to all this [laughs], which I think y-, I don't know, I pr-, presume you've worked before with u-, other people, you know, doing this, so he's been through this once or twice, right? [chuckles]
Steve?
Yes.
You're the first person on this particular...
Oh, really. Oh, did I scare you?
[laughter]
[laughs] I've heard some stories.
Yeah, right. Really. Really. I, it's that I fye-, I find that, uh, that, uh, um, again, this embarrassment, this loss of dignity that my parents, you know, one of these, you're...you're not filming any more, are you? You're done.
As long as you're not gonna say something that I wanna use in the film.
01:18:59 Uh, well, one of the SS men slugged my father, and it wasn't so much th-, but the loss of dignities, and th-, that's why, they way I, I mean, I feel that I need to be more dignified my whole, that's why I'm serious. I don't like people who do things like that to any-, I mean, for instance, you know, spanking children. I.. . I, despite the fact that, you know, occasionally they need it, I never – neither did my husband – hit my kids. You know, I used to, you know, I used to use punishment, like you're grounded for God knows how – the first time my son ever drove a car after he got his license, he took some friends to a ball game. Well, you're going to a ball game, it was at one o'clock, he said, “Mom, can I use your car?” I said, “Sure,” 'cause he didn't have one. Uh, he said, “Well, I'm going with So-and So and we're gonna see the ball game.” Fine. So you see your, send your son off for, see the ball game at one o'clock, when do you expect 'em home? Four o'clock, five o'clock, six o'clock, seven o'clock, eight o'clock. My husba-, “Where's your car?” “David's got the car.” “Where's David?” Who's to know where David is? He comes strolling in at four o'clock in the morning. Well, by that time, I called all the hospital and all, I was furious, and he got it, too. I mean, I wouldn't let my kids get away with too much, but on the other hand, I.. . I don't think I was a mean mother, either [chuckles], at least I hope I wasn't a mean mother. I don't know, but I never would hit my children, never, and I, when, you know, sometimes you go to the grocery store and this kid's screaming its head off and you wanna [makes zipping noise] go like that to it, and the mother just keeps shopping and kee- [laughs], but it, when you're a mother you can do these things. I.. . I, you know, I w-, I, uh, my kids would never behave like that anyway, as far as I.. . I.. . I don't think so. I d-, my son was a little busy fellow, you know, I mean, he had a friend and...and that kind of thing. Thank God I had no problems with drugs and I had no.... I really, really, really had good kids, you know. Yeah, you know, I mean, I.. . I really do, and I think I've taught them to be independent, which in a way I'm a little sorry about, but not much, I mean, to be independent adults who...who, you know, that kind of thing.
That's always a good thing.
I think so, too.
Well, thank you.
Well, thank you. [laughs] I mean, I'm sorry to keep you so long. What time is it?
Oh, that's all right. [ending logistics]
[end recording] Klara Lee page PAGE 28
