NAME: ROY W. DODD INTERVIEWER: HERBERT JENKINS CAMP: DACHAU DATE: JANUARY 18, 1979
Q: This is January 18, 1979. I am Herbert Jenkins and I am here to interview Mr. Roy Dodd regarding the Holocaust program and Mr. Dodd's experience in World War II. We appreciate your seeing us this morning, Mr. Dodd. Will you give us your name and address and any statement you feel like making. What kind of surprise or what was your reaction when you were in the act of helping liberate these camps? So I won’t interfere with your statement, just make a statement in your own words as you see fit.
A: I went into the army when I was 18 years old. We were in Hawaii during Pearl Harbor. We came back in 1943 and formed the Rainbow Division. We trained out in Oklahoma. We went to Europe in 1944. We were in the Battle of the Bulge and it was quite an experience for me. We crossed the Danube River and my outfit was one of the first to liberate or get into Dachau. Of course, I wasn't there on the first day.
As far as my memory serves me, I think it was either the second or third day.
Q: What was your outfit?
A: My outfit was the 222nd Infantry Division, the 42nd Division. And it was an experience, if you want to call it an experience. I can't really say that was an experience. It was just something that I wish hadn't ever seen and I hope that I never see it again. Unless you see something like that, it is unbelievable.
Q: There was a group that went in ahead of you? Was it part of the same outfit?
A: Yes. It was either the lst Battalion or the 3rd Battalion. I was in the 2nd Battalion. It was a long time ago, but if my memory serves me correctly, it was the 3rd Battalion that was the one who was the first there.
Q: Did you have any advance notice? Did you know what you were about to run into?
A: We didn't know what we were going into. Of course, I knew what I was going into because a fellow from either the 1st Battalion or the 3rd Battalion had seen it. I'm quite sure, though, that they didn't know what they were going into or what they were going to see.
Q: You had no preparation to be prepared for what you would see.
A: No, and I tell you, I've got memories of it. It didn't affect me, but I'm quite sure that for the persons that were in there it was a horrible sight.
Q: What did you actually find?
A: I never did get into Dachau, but I saw the railroad cars with the bodies in the cars, the boxcars. They never had removed some of the bodies.
Q: Did you see any of the guards at this camp?
A: I can't really say that I did. I've heard some of the men say that the prisoners were eating bread that was splattered with blood. Now again, I can't verify that because I wasn't there at that time.
Q: But the guards had already gone and the American soldiers were in
charge.
A: When I got there, the American soldiers had gotten all the guards and all the dogs. They had two rows of fences. The people were in one side and the dogs were in another fence. It must have be 10 or 12 feet high with barbed wire on top.
Q: Did you see any of the prisoners there? You saw all these corpses in these boxcars, but how about the people in the prisons that were liberated?
A: I never actually got into the prison. To describe it, I would say it looked like a university from the front.
Q: A nice appearance?
A: Oh, it was beautiful. Well, if you want to use that word. I wouldn't use it now.
Q: That was the outside appearance.
A: In other words, it was a false appearance, if you want to use those words.
Q: When you got inside or got nearer, what did you actually see?
A: As I said, I never did get inside. We just saw the what we call [unintelligible] boxcars. They had never removed all the bodies on the outside
A: Did you see any of the prisoners that were coming out? Prisoners that were being liberated?
Q: No. They were processing them I assume. I could see through the wire that they were either processing them or giving them food. What they were doing I don't know.
Q: What was your reaction to this?
A: I don't know. At that time, I can't recall. But everybody in my outfit was very angry about it. If we could have gotten to them, I believe we would have done them the same way they done the prisoners. I mean, that's just my opinion.
Q: Is there anything that comes to your mind that you can tell us that will help us understand this situation better such as what caused it and what we are going to have to do to keep it from happening again.
A: I wish that I knew. I wish I could solve that problem myself, but I can't.
Q: But it was a shocking experience.
A: From what I saw and, like I said, I didn't see one half of what the first men that got in there saw. I just hope that I never have to see it again.
Q: How long did you stay there?
A: I don't know. Of course, we were on the move at that time. We had the war won, but we were just on a mopping up situation. I guess we stayed around there for a couple of days, if that much. We were strictly on the move the whole time we were there.
Q: And where did you go from there? Did you have the opportunity to see any other prison camps?
A: No, that was the only one that I saw that I recall. I might be wrong, but it seems to me that we left there and went to Furth and to Nuremburg and then from Nuremburg we went into Austria. Of course, that's where I got to come back home from. Einsbach, Austria.
Q: Thank you very much, Mr. Dodd.
[Interruption in tape. Conversation resumes as follows.]
Q: You say there's some additional information you might be able to provide us?
A: There might be. We have a Rainbow Division that meets about twice each year here in Atlanta and then we have a national organization. You could probably write them or get in touch with them. They've got a book printed but mine got away from me some way. It has much more information in it than I could possibly give you, Of course, if I had the book here and could go through the pages and remember things, but, as it is, I can't think of the gentleman's name. He works at Rich's. He’s the president of our local chapter here. This organization has been going on since World War I. There was a Rainbow Division in World War I. We have a memorial out there at Camp Grouber in Oklahoma. It the Rainbow Division's memorial, in Muskogee, Oklahoma. Next time I get one of our papers, I'll send it to you and you can get in touch with the Rainbow Division headquarters. I think it is somewhere in Virginia, or it might be in Chicago now.
Q: But the president of your local here works at Rich’s. Do you know what department he works in?
A: No, I was trying to think. I know that there's a Jack Callaway that lives on Old Ivy Rd. He's World War I veteran. I don’t know what his address is but it’s Old Ivy Rd. You might be able to get in touch with him and he can put you in touch with the national headquarters.
Q: You get periodic publications?
A: About once a month or one ever two months.
Q: And when you get the next one, you’ll send us a copy of it. A: If you leave your address, I certainly will.
Q: Thank you very much.
