United States Holocaust Memorial Museum Interview with Stefan Czyzewski April 8, 1998
RG-50.030*0387
PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a videotaped interview with Stefan Czyzewski, conducted by Katie Davis on April 8, 1998 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview took place in Minneapolis, MN and is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
STEFAN CZYZEWSKI
April 8, 1998
01:00:29
A: …eyes and when somebody open up with a Schmeisserfrom a side, it hit me right in the top of the head, it practically scalped me. There was a big scar across, it was blood all over. And my friend got hit, apparently the same set of bullets hit him right here and took a top of his head. So I grabbed him and I ran with him for about 400 feet. And I could never lift him because he was a big boy, about his size – your size.
Q: And you lifted him that day?
A: I lifted him, I grabbed him, I had his gun – his rifle and my rifle and some other items, and him. I must have – I must have run about three or 400 feet before I ran into my own boys and we put him down and tried to get help and of course he was beyond help because his top of a head was gone. So I had my head fixed and then after war in Germany, I got a good German surgeon and he cut it open again and left only a little, tiny – I mean, it was a scar, I’m – it was enormous scar. So he left only a little, tiny scar there. But I still – when I take my hat off, I kind of remember that blood running and the whole, horrible, open thing there, just like my top of a head was completely open down to the brains. But it wasn’t, the –
Q: But it was also seeing him, too.
A: It was, yes. So I keep my hat on, just about everywhere. I take it off in church and I – I take it off when I go to bed. I keep it at – on at work. Everybody is used to it or if they are not, they better be.
Q: Right, right.
A: There was – went to Miss Batchelor’s wedding. I had my hat on, and they had skullcaps.
And I was going to have a special skullcap made for me because I was the honorary grandfather…. Right, an, an English speaking person can’t.
Q: How – how do you pronounce it again? A: Czyzewski.
Q: Czyzewski.
1 Schmeisser submachine gun
