United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Zygmund Shipper
November 17, 2008
RG-50.030*0526 PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a taped interview with Zygmund Shipper, conducted on May 27, 2008 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
ZYGMUND SHIPPER
May 27, 2008
Beginning Tape One
Question: Good morning, Mr. Shipper.
Answer: Good morning to you.
Q: Thank you very much for agreeing to be interviewed with us today.
A: Now, it’s a -- it’s my pleasure and it’s an honor to come to the United States, you know, to be interviewed. So, I’m only too pleased to be here.
Q: Well, we’re glad to have you. Tell me if you would your -- the name you were born with and what town you were born in.
A: I -- my name is -- originally was Zygmund Shipper. Now it is Ziggy Shipper, you know, because in England Zygmund would have been a problem, you know, with pronunciation and -- but it was -- it’s Shipper now and it was Shipper originally, except the spelling was different, it was S-zed-y-p-e-r and now it’s S-h-i- double p -e-r. The reason, my wife decided when we got married, because when we had children they had problems at school, you know, is it Zyper, is it Zipper? So we thought the best thing is that we change the spelling, and we did. Now, I was born in a city, second biggest city in Poland, called Lódz, L-o-d-zed, and that’s where I lived til I was deported from Lódz.
Q: And you were born in 1930, is that correct?
A: I was born, yes, 18th of January, 1930.
Q: And tell me a little about your parents.
A: Well, unfortunately my parents, you know -- I come from a very Orthodox family, Jewish Orthodox family and my parents were divorced and my mother left me with my father and my grandparents. And with a Jewish family in the 1930’s Orthodox, divorce was as bad as death, or even worse, you know. It was such a terrible thing for a Jewish family, you know. So as far as I knew, you know, after awhile, you know, I -- I thought my mother was dead, and I didn’t see my mother and that was it. So I was just left with my grandparents, of course, and my father, which my father worked, so I didn’t see that much of him either. But my grandmother, as far as I can remember, she was a wonderful woman and I owe her so much that I wish I could have told her that when I grew up, but unfortunately there was no chance of that.
Q: Yeah. Would you like to tell me your grandparents’ names and where they were from?
