United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Lillyan Rosenberg
August 31, 2006
RG-50.030*0510
PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a taped interview with Lillyan Rosenberg, conducted by Amy Rubin on August 31, 2006 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
LILLYAN ROSENBERG
August 31, 2006 Beginning Tape One, Side A
Question: This is a United States Holocaust Memorial Museum interview with Lillyan Rosenberg, conducted by Amy Rubin on August 31st, 2006. This interview is made possible by a grant from Carole and Maurice Berk. This is tape number one, side A. Mrs. Rosenberg, could you please begin by telling me your full name as it is today, and also what was your name at birth?
Answer: My name is Lillyan Rosenberg, and I was born Lilly Cohn in Halberstadt, Germany. I now live in New York in Beechhurst, Queens.
Q: When were you born?
A: January 30th, 1928.
Q: And tell me a little bit about your family.
A: My family lived in Halberstadt for many, many years. In fact, my grandfather was already born in Halberstadt. So we have a history of about 300 years and I have some very old papers that go back to my grandparents living in Germany and they lived in Halberstadt all these years. And my co -- family was very comfortable, and had a very cultured, lovely life in my early childhood.
Q: Who was in your immediate family?
A: My immediate family in New York?
Q: No, in -- in Halberstadt, when you were a child.
A: When I was a child, I had one brother. My brother’s name was Vanna, Vanna Cohn, and he was born in 1923, and I was born in 1928, so my parents just had two children. My father’s name was Ernst Cohn, my mother’s name -- maiden name was Margaret -- Marguerita Marcuza, later on Marguerita Cohn. And my grandfather’s name, who was also in Halberstadt, was Hugo Cohn. He was married to Zelma Lusch.
Q: Tell me a little bit about the personalities of your parents.
A: My father had a linen factory, and we had a very good sized store in the same building where we lived. The store was downstairs and had many employees. The articles that were sold were mostly very elegant linens. In fact, when my parents sent me to England as a little girl, my suitcase has many linens from my parent’s home, and I’m still using them today.
Q: And what about his personality? Can you describe him to me?
A: My father was a very jovial person. He was a happy person. I remember many parties at our house and my parents were good dancers. And the parties which my parents gave is something that always remained with me, because it was a very comfortable, lovely home in my early childhood.
Q: And your mother, your mother’s personality?
A: I think I’m a lot like my mother. My mother was born Marguerita Marcuza in Stargard, and the area was called Pommern. Stargard in Pommern is now Polish. My mother was a very hospitable person, and as I remember, there were many cultured type of affairs such as music at home. There was always piano playing and entertaining, and these were the early memories that I have.
Q: What about memories of your family at home? What are some of the earliest memories you have of your family all together?
A: Well, the synagogue played an important part. Every Friday night the men would go to synagogue. I think my mother was home on Friday night, and then there was the usual Shabbas dinner. And I do have a picture of the dining room table on a regular Shabbat evening, with the candles, and the challah, the kiddish cup, and my grandfather, who lived upstairs, would always be at our house every Friday evening. This would be routine, and then on a Shabbat morning, we always went to synagogue. The synagogue played a big role in my childhood. The men and women were seated separately. The men were downstairs and the women were upstairs like in a gallery. The children were with the women and we would look through this little fence-type thing and go downs -- look downstairs at the men. And I would look forward to the one particular time that the children were allowed downstairs in the main synagogue, and that was Simchas Torah, when they had s-sweets and candies for the children. And I even remember playing a prank here or there in the synagogue by putting some bread -- breadcrumbs or cookies into some men’s jackets. My friend Ruth Oppenheimer, her name then was Ruth Lindheimer, but she also lives in New York, and we are still very, very good friends, I talk to her daily, well she and I played this prank and we put these cookies, or crumbs into men’s suits and pockets. And eventually we had to go and own up to it and apologize. We did.
Q: Do you remember the name of the synagogue?
A: I only remember my [indecipherable]. I don’t know if it had a particular name. There was one -- this was the main synagogue, and then there was another little synagogue called Klaus, and that was for those who were super, super Orthodox. And there were quite a few Jewish family who were very, very Orthodox. And in the building which used to be the Klaus synagogue is where they are now having the new little museum to commemorate and try to show what Jewish life was like before Hitler.
Q: And what about your family, would you consider your family Orthodox? Your family in Halberstadt?
A: No, my family in Halberstadt was not considered very Orthodox, although we had separate dishes for milk and meat, and by American standards, I would con -- probably say it would have been Orthodox. But by the standards of Halberstadt, it was not considered to be so, because people were either extremely Orthodox -- and I remember my mother saying [indecipherable] kosher, which means we are new kosher, and that meant we’re not so terribly strict.
Q: So, can you describe to me a little more about the town of Halberstadt?
A: It was a very charming town of mostly half-timbered houses. Half-timbered means it’s sort of cement and wood together, with a great deal of detail of wood. And I remember some of the old buildings, one having a statue on the outside, and that is the town hall. This statue was called Bucco, and we learned a little poem as children, which says Bucco von Halberstadt [speaks German here]. And it means, Bucco from Halberstadt, what will you give our children? Will you give them a new pair of shoes? Yes, that’s what your children should have. And I remember some of these children’s songs and some of these children’s poems, because I was 10 and a half years old when I left Halberstadt.
Q: And how large of a Jewish community in Halberstadt, would you say? A: I really don’t know, but there were hundreds of families, but I do not know the exact number. I am sure that that could be found at the mew -- new museum, which is now called the Moses Mendelssohn Academy. They would have all the exact figures and details.
Q: What was your sense of things, was it a -- a fairly large Jewish community for the size of the town?
A: Yes, I believe it was. As a matter of fact, Halberstadt was well renowned in the Jewish circles, because of having a large community and a very active synagogue, and a very active Jewish community life. I have noticed that in some of those old papers that I have, and the ones that date back about 300 years, they were written in Hebrew, so we had some of those translated. And they -- it said for instance, that many businesses were conducted while in s -- during or after synagogue when people -- it was a meeting place, so it was a very active Jewish community.
Q: And what about your family? Do you remember if it was mostly Jewish friends that your family had, or also non-Jewish friends in the town?
A: I do think that my -- the majority of my parent’s friends were Jewish. Also, the children I went to school with, since I was at the Jewish school, they were all Jewish, and the parents would be fren -- friendly for many, many years.
Q: And can you describe to me a little more in terms of a physical description, your home?
A: Our home was a rather elegant home. It was situated right above these stores, which were at ground level. My grandfather owned the property, and there were at least three to four bedrooms, a large living room, then there was -- the living was qua -- w-was -- the efs -- there was [speaks German], which is a smoking room. So it’s a dining room, living room, smoking room. My parent’s bedroom, my brother’s bedroom, and mine, and there was a guest bedroom. And everything was rather elegantly furnished. We had a maid who took care of my brother and myself. Her name was Alvina, and she was with us for many, many years. I have a picture even now of Alvina and my brother and I being at the wedding and I was the flower girl, age about four or five years old, with little flowers in the hair. But I do have the picture of Alvina. She married a man who was a carpenter, and my parents asked this ge -- this gentleman to make a copy of our kitchen, so I had a small kitchen, a replica of my parent’s kitchen, and as a child I played with that a great deal. And when I went to England my par -- parents actually sent that children’s furniture to England. What happened to it, I don’t know.
Q: What are your earliest memories as a child?
A: They were happy memories and I remember the first day of school, where my friend Ruth Lindheimer [indecipherable] and I started school together. And children at school get like a big bag, like a huge cone out of cardboard, and that is filled with candy and toys and pencils. So that was a very happy kind of memory. That was approximately 1935, and I was at the Jewish school until the school was closed, and that was after Kristallnacht - Crystal Night.
Q: So one of your first memories is -- is probably the first day of school, and -- and tell me more about school, other memories you have of the early days of being in school.
A: I guess things were still quite normal in the early days. For instance, Hebrew was taught from the beginning on, like a foreign language. Later on I would learn a foreign language by translation. And so we translated prayers, and not only learned to translate word for word, but also how to make little sentences, so that we had a fairly good knowledge of Hebrew. I can still read Hebrew, although I must say that when I left Germany, I had little contact later on with Jewish people.
Q: So you were at a religious school?
A: Yes, the school was religious and the headmaster’s name was Luntner, Herr Luntner. That family had five children in various ages from -- some -- the older one was called yo -- Jota, and she came with me to the train station on the day I left Germany. But school was a happy time, and it seemed perfectly normal, we did the usual things, like gymnastics. I would walk to school, it was not very far, probably a 10 minute walk. And having been back in Germany a couple of years ago, I saw the building again.
Q: Do you know the name of the school?
A: Yeah, this was the Juda [indecipherable] in Halberstadt. The Jewish school in Halberstadt. How many chil -- students were there, I don’t know, but I do have a picture of all the students together, taken in Halberstadt at a time when my brother and I were at school together, and my friend Ruth, and her present husband Henry are also on that picture. There are approximately 40 students on that photo which I have.
Q: Now tell me a little more about your brother, his personality and when you were very young, did the two of you get along, did you fight? Tell me about him.
A: Well, my brother was, as I said, five years older than I, and he seemed to be very proud of having a little sister. He often told me later on as we were growing up that he said [speaks German here]. In other words that means I or -- put in an order for you. So he was very proud of having a little sister. Although, as I grew up, I think I was sometimes a bit of a burden when my parents said they had to take me along, and I would drag behind all these boys, who were teenagers by then, and they had to take along the younger sister. So it wasn’t always great fun for him, but perfectly normal. However, my brother took great responsibility for me. Obviously, my parents must have said that he should keep an eye on me always, and he always did because the two of us were in England, even though we were not together.
Q: And what about, since you were at a Jewish school, I’m imagining the other students are Jewish, did you have any non-Jewish friends in the town of Halberstadt?
A: I can’t remember any discrimination, but I actually don’t think that among my circle of friends that there were non-Jewish friends, because they were probably children I went to school with, and children whose parents my parents knew. So I don’t have any real collection -- recollection of anyone non-Jewish.
Q: Now, when the Nazis came to power, you were very young. And tell me what your very earliest memories are about the beginning of the Nazis and the Hitler regime.
A: You know, times were not like they are today where you put on a television and you see instantly what is happening in some other part of the world. And I think my parents shielded us from any extra worries, or extra concerns. However, I do remember seeing signs in the windows that said, Juden [indecipherable]. That means, Jews are not welcome here. And I would question that sort of thing by -- because I could read by then. In 1933, Hitler came to power on my birthday, January 30th. Other schools had a holiday because Hitler was in power, it was a day off from school. Not in the Jewish school, we went to school. And then one day, coming from school -- and this would be closer to like 1938, other kids would call across the street, look at those Jews, look at those Jewish children, and the kids would throw stones at us. And I said -- I could not understand, why would they be throwing stones at us, we weren’t doing anything. And you’d run home as quick as possible. So these are my first bad feelings on knowing that something was going on beyond our control.
Q: Well, you would run home and you would probably talk to your parents about this. What were they telling you? Do you remember any of the discussions with your parents?
A: I was aware that there was a Nazi party, because the other children, who were not Jewish, belonged to an organization called the Hitlerjugend. The Hitler youth. And of course, my brother did not belong to the Hitler youth, who would have been maybe 14 or 15 at that time. But the Jewish youngsters had their own organization, the Maccabee or some other clubs that they would have. But the Hitler youth were very visible in Germany, and of course I was aware of that. But it was not a major discussion in my parent’s home until the night of Kristallnacht, when the Nazis came to our home in the middle of the night, and they knocked at the door, and if -- everybody was sleeping, it was an ordinary night, no one expected anything unusual. And there were two men at the door, and they said, we are here to get mis -- Mr. Cohn, Ernst Cohn, my father. And he had to get dressed very quickly, and the two men marched downstr -- the street. Our home is diagonally across from the main post office. The main post office is still there, our home is not. And as we looked out, we could see other Jewish men, each one with two SS men, they’re -- the Nazis. And they walked them off, we did not know where they were going. They took them and put them into a prison in Halberstadt. And a couple of hours later they knocked at our door again, and they said, we came to get the other Mr. Cohn. And my mother said, you already took him, he’s gone, he -- he left. And they said, there’s another one. Well, my brother was hiding in a closet or somewhere that same night. And she said, the only other Herr Cohn is upstairs, but you would have to carry him because he is an invalid and he is very old. They said no, that’s not the one, and they left. That way my brother was not taken. My father was then taken to Buchenwald, a concentration camp.
Q: Can you -- can I ask you, what was this like? You were very young, and -- and was this very frightening, that night that this happened?
A: Well, I realized that things were terribly, terribly wrong, and it’s a -- an extraordinarily scary event for any child. I did not know the multitude of significance of what was happening on a worldwide basis at the time. My father was in Buchenwald for a little over five weeks. We did find out where he was. I don’t know whether it was Red Cross letters, or -- by some way, my mother knew where my father was. And he came home after five weeks, a good five weeks in Buchenwald, and his hair was shaven from his head completely, he had lost a lot of weight. And my father, having been on the road as a salesman for many years, said, I always brought you something home, well I brought you something. And he had dry bread in his pockets that was very, very hard, but he said, I brought this for you. It was then, when my father came home, that my parents decided they must do something to rescue the lives of their children, for my brother and I. And they then registered me for the -- or both of us for the kindertransport. My brother, however, was 15 at the time, and I was 10, and at 15 they no longer took children on the kindertransport. They took them from four to 14, and he was a little too old, so he was not able to have guardians in England like I did.
Q: Now, let me ask you, before Kristallnacht, did you notice -- do you remember other things that were happening and changing? Did you ask any -- you know, additional questions of your parents? Do you remember anything else going on even before all of this happened at Kristallnacht?
A: Well, they came to every Jewish home and collect -- demanded all silver and gold. So my parents had to give up the jewelry, and I believe they must have hidden certain things, they did not give up everything. But they hi -- picked up sil -- silverware. You were allowed to keep two sets of silver per person. So I don’t know just how many things my parents were able to save legitimately, but I remember them coming to every Jewish home and collecting these items. And of course my father’s store was closed. You were no longer allowed to have a store, to run a business, which my -- was in my f -- grandfather’s hands, and then my father’s hands for many, many years. There was this line and fabrique Halberstadt. But it was closed, and I think my father took a little suitcase, and traveled with this suitcase to some of his customers who were located in the country -- countryside somewhere, and he would continue doing some business, going by train.
Q: What happened to that shop once it was shut? Did anything else happen there, did others take it over?
