United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Norbert Krasnosielski
November 24, 2009
RG-50.030*0544 PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a recorded interview with Norbert Krasnosielski, conducted by Nahum Krasnosielski on November 24, 2009 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview took place in Washington, DC and is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
NORBERT KRASNOSIELSKIPRIVATE
November 24, 2009
Question: This is a United States Holocaust Memorial Museum interview with Nahum Krasnosielski, conducted by Ina Navazelskis on November 24, 2009 at the Holocaust Museum in Washington, D.C. Thank you Mr. Krasnosielski for coming today to talk to us.
Answer: Thank you very much, I am very glad to see you here.
Q: Okay. We will start, as we always do in our interviews, from the beginning. I’d like to get a sense of where you were born, what your family was like, who was your father, who was your mother, where did you grow up. So tell me about your childhood, your early years.
A: I wanted to tell you that in the first part of my biography, that I have written in Polish, all these details are there, but I will try to repeat some of them.
Q: Thank you.
A: I am born January the 25th, 1918. So, I have 91 years.
Q: You don’t look it at all.
A: Thank you very much.
Q: And where were you born?
A: I am born in a small town, at this time, Nikopol’, Dnipropetrovs’ka Oblast’.
Q: Oh, so that’s in eastern Ukraine.
A: This is eastern Ukraine. Zaporosh’ye, which is very popular in Polish literature.
Q: Mm-hm.
A: There were the Cossacks and the – the – the front of [indecipherable] and many other events. Now, Nikopol’ is a lot bigger, an industrial city in Ukraine.
Q: An industrial city in the Ukraine. Hang on just a minute. When did you leave the Ukraine?
A: If I can remember, probably in 1921 –
Q: What are you –
A: – when I was three years old.
Q: Do you have any early memories at all?
A: No, I have some memories, because in a small town, not far from Nikopol’, the town Kakhovka was living a mm-mm – o-omotat – omotologist(ph), my father’s brother, Krasnosielski too.
Q: Uh-huh.
A: And he has two daughters there. We didn't have any big contacts with him, because we lived in Poland, and they didn’t leave Kakhovka, and were continuing to live in Ukraine.
Q: I see. Tell me a little bit about your father and your mother.
A: My mother was a tsohn(ph) doctor, and my father was a tsohn(ph) doctor.
Q: What’s a tsohn(ph) doctor?
A: Teeth.
Q: Teeth, ah, he’s a dentist.
A: A dentist, yes.
Q: I see.
A: My mother was a dentist, my father was a dentist and two my father’s brothers were dentists, too.
Q: A dentist family.
A: Yes, a dentist family.
Q: And what, at that point, when you moved to Nesvizh, was it part of Poland, or part of Belarussia?
A: Well, we came to Nesvizh, we changed our country from Soviet Russia to Poland, where both of my parents were citizens of Poland.
Q: How did they become citizens of Poland? Were they from there originally? A: They were born in Poland.
Q: Ah.
A: Because this part of Poland belonged to tsarist Russia.
Q: Russia. Of course, of course. And so, what prompted them to move to Nesvizh in 1921?
A: The great [indecipherable] connected with the revolution in Russia, made the life very hard, and many Jews at this time, who had citizenship from another country, tried to go there. And because my father was born in Nesvizh, and my mother was born in Wilno, so both were born at the territory of Poland.
Q: Yes. Yes. Did you have brothers and sisters?
A: I don’t have any sisters and any brothers. One of my brothers died at the age of six years, probably from hunger in time of revolution.
Q: So he was older than you?
A: He was older than I am, but he died before my birthday.
Q: I see. So, did you grow up as an only child?
A: Yes.
Q: I see. [tape break]
Q: This is a continuation of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum interview with Norbert Nahum Krasnosielski. So, we were talking about your childhood, your – the family’s move from nepr – Dnipropetrovs’ka to Nesvizh.
A: Nikopol’
Q: Niko – from Nikopol’ –
A: Nikopol’. Dnipropetrovs’ka is the county.
Q: Ah, from Nikopol’ to Nesvizh, and that you were an only child and that you come from a family of dentists, basically. Mother, father, uncles. And is that what they did in Nesvizh? Is that what they beg – continued their professional life?
A: Unfortunately, it came to a divorce, and I left myself with my mother.
Q: I see.
A: My father went to Vilnius, and he was the head of the Vilnius Zionist organization.
Q: That’s quite interesting. Did you visit him there? Did you have contact with him?
A: Very seldom, but yes. He wanted to come back to my mother, but he was a Cohain.
Q: What’s a Cohain?
A: A Cohain is a section of religious beliefs, and a Cohain can’t come back to his former wife.
Q: What a contradiction for him.
A: Yes. And when I met him in Vilnius, I heard that he said to my mother [speaks foreign language here]
Q: What does that mean?
A: Around me are criminals. And he –
Q: What was he referring to? What do you think he was referring to?
A: He died at the age of 47 years, because of some events from the time of revolution, he ate something that it is forbidden to eat. And he had with his stomach a very hard illness, and he died in Vilnius at 47 years.
Q: And what – what year do you th – did he die? Do you remember? Was it – how old were you at the time?
A: I was probably 15 years old.
Q: Oh, so it was in the 30s he died?
A: Yes.
Q: And what are – what are the memories of your father that you have? What kind of a person was he?
A: My memories of my father are maybe for me interesting. He had snihas(ph) afrabonis(ph). It means he had a document that he can be a rof(ph), a raggi(ph).
Q: Oh, really?
A: Yes. And he taught at one of the famous yeshivot.
Q: Really?
A: Yes.
Q: In Vilnius?
A: No. Probably, or in Glatzk(ph) or in Mier(ph), one of the two cities with very big synagogues, and many people were coming to study there from America, from all the world. And when my mother was angry on him, she said utchi(ph) saleeshka(ph).
Q: He’s a teacher at –
A: A small teacher, utchi(ph) saleeshka(ph).
Q: Women know how to get it to a man, they really do. So – so, what’s important for you is that he nevertheless had this kind of experience, this kind of bent, this – this direction. What about personally? Did you feel close to him?
A: From time to time he was sending me Hebrew books, because for one year I was in a Hebrew school, Farwood in Nesvizh.
Q: Uh-huh.
A: And the memories of Nesvizh are the most living memories for me.
Q: Tell me about them.
A: There were my best friends. There – there were my best friend’s girls. And Nesvizh played a very big role in my –
Q: Life.
A: – development.
Q: I see.
A: Yeah.
Q: So tell me – tell me then about your mother. What was she like? Did she start dentistry? Did she then become – have her own practice? How did she raise you?
A: It was very hard, and her friends said that she is a bearyai(ph).
Q: And what does that mean?
A: A bearyai(ph) in Hebrew, it is a lady who knows how to do everything.
Q: Were they right?
A: Yes. And well, in Vilnius was hard with earning –
Q: That’s right. A living.
A: Es-Especially after 1929.
Q: Why was this an – after 1929?
A: After 1929 begin the great depression in America.
Q: That’s right.
A: And Nesvizh received a lot of money from Jews who came from Nesvizh to America years ago. And in time of this crisis, they began to stop to finance the Jewish community.
Q: Ah.
A: So, my mother said to me – I was already 15 - 16 years old, so she said, maybe we will go to a small town where there is no dentist.
Q: So there were already dentists in Nesvizh, there was too much competition?
A: Yes. And she said, you will be the geographer. You will find someplace to go. And I found for her a place, a small town, Landvaroof(ph).
Q: Landvaroof(ph), is that on this map?
A: I don’t know if it is, Landvaroof(ph), close to Vilnius.
Q: It’s close to Vilnius, uh-huh.
A: Yeah. Yes. It – it – it is here. It is in 10 kilometers on the line Vilnius, Warsaw.
Q: Lukaradishkis(ph) is what it says here on the map. [indecipherable] is different.
A: [indecipherable] probably they call it different.
Q: Yes.
A: In Polish this Landvaroof(ph).
Q: Landvaroof(ph).
A: Yes.
Q: And do you remember what year you moved there?
A: We didn’t move there.
Q: Oh.
A: My mother took the necessary instruments in a small case, and she came to Landvaroof(ph), and she bought from a hairdresser a better chair for patients, and she worked all the day there, and in the evening she was coming back to Vilnius.
Q: To Vilnius, but not to Nesvizh.
A: No, no.
Q: I see. So –
A: That was already in Vilnius.
Q: So – okay. So the year you move to Vilnius would have been 1929 - 1930, do you remember?
A: Probably 1930.
Q: So, did you see your father more often once you and your mother moved to –
A: No, because he moved to Warsaw.
Q: I see.
A: He tried not to meet, th-the old –
Q: Family.
A: – family.
Q: Did he have a new family?
A: Yes. He had a new family, and the people that he called so dar –
Q: Such a name.
A: – so hard, were the people who were around him, were living from American money, that were receiving from New Jersey. What is the capital of New Jersey?
Q: Trent – probably Trenton, yeah. Trenton, Trenton.
A: Trenton.
Q: I believe it – Trenton, yeah.
A: In Trenton he has a small factory of paper, and he was sending them dollars. When they began acquaintance with receiving from him dollars, most of them didn’t work.
Q: This is a very well known syndrome.
A: Yes.
Q: This is a very well known syndrome. Hang on just a second. So, let’s go back a little bit to Nesvizh –
A: Yes.
Q: – because I want – you say your happiest development – you know, your happiest memories are from growing up there. Is that sa – is that so?
A: Yes.
Q: Tell me about what some of those memories are.
A: I have a collection of photographs of Nesvizh.
Q: Mm-hm.
A: I brought it if now from Lithuania, from a sanitarium, where there were some people from White Russia, and when I told them that I know Nesvizh they were very excited and they send me photographs of Nesvizh, how Nesvizh looks now. And they called Nesvizh the pearl of White Russia.
Q: And why is it so? Why – why is Nesvizh so special?
A: I think that mostly thanks to the family of the Radziwells, because they heard in Nesvizh there might be a big palace. I don’t know if there is a second such in the former Poland. And around the palace was a beautiful park. And the Catholic priests brought Italian artists, who painted the churches in Nesvizh. So, it was a small town, but some very excellent in architecture, in culture, and in Jewish life, too.
Q: In what way – what was special in Jewish life in Nesvizh?
A: In Jewish life, the most of the people were intelligentsia.
Q: Ah, ah.
A: Mostly. And when they needed a university, they send their young people to Vilnius to the University of Jan Batory.
Q: Stefan Batory.
A: Stefan Batory.
Q: Batory, mm-hm.
A: Stefan Batory was a Hungarian, or to Lemberg to Lwów.
Q: Oh yeah, oh yeah.
A: In Lwow was the University of Jan Kazimierz, one of the Polish kings.
Q: Do you have a particular memory from Nesvizh about your own life that is special?
A: About my own life is much of excitement. The school was excellent, the Polish gymnasium.
Q: Is that where you attended?
A: Yes.
Q: Mm-hm.
