Interview with Thomas BuergenthalPRIVATE
November 28, 1995 Tape 1, Side A
Question: I'm just going to have you say your name and when you were born.
Answer: Thomas Buergenthal, born in Czechoslovakia -- Lubochnia, Czechoslovakia. Today it's Slovakia.
Q: I'm going to speak with you today mostly about the period after the war and liberation, but I do have one question about the time that you spent in concentration camp, which is this: at the period when you were still with your mother and father, did they ever sit you down and, in essence, sort of give you advice on how to survive, try to teach you a survival strategy, or did they themselves know what actually might work in that situation?
A: Well, I -- not really in any sort of formal sense, at least, I don't remember it. Of course, as a child, you probably learn much more from observing than you do from being told things. But I do remember my father saying -- when we were -- when he and I were left alone -- that the one thing that was critical was not to eat food that was dirty or contaminated. That's the only sort of thing I remember because a lot of people would try to eat things out of garbage cans, and then of course get sick. He always warned me about that. Otherwise, I really can't think of them sort of telling me “You should do this or that,” but one of course saw a lot of things that one had to do. I observed my father, who's great strength was that, that you could see that he always thought things out before he did it, and he would not be sort of cowed into running but he would make his decision and then stick by it and that was something I noticed, that a lot of people got killed or were caught because they acted too fast. They didn't sort of take account of the environment and then act. That's something he did; he was a master at that.
Q: There was a point where you had been separated from your mother and you were able to see your mother briefly, in a concentration camp. Did she say anything at that point, give you any advice?
