United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Robert Holczer January 10 and April 29, 1996 and March 17, 1999
RG-50.030*0467 PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a taped interview with Robert Holczer, conducted by Arwen Donahue on January 10 and April 29, 1996 and March 17, 1999 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
ROBERT HOLCZER January 10 and April 29, 1996 and March 17, 1999 Tape 1, Side A
Q: This is Arwen Donahue. It’s January 10th, 1996 and I’m here with Mr. Robert Holczer in Paris, Kentucky and this is a United States Holocaust Memorial Museum interview tape one, side A. And Mr., Mr. Holczer, if we can just begin by you telling me your name at birth and the place of birth and your date of birth.
A: I, my name is Robert Holczer. I was born in Budapest in 1929, August 31.
Q: And, will you tell me something about your mother and your father, their, their names and their family backgrounds?
A: My father was, my father’s name is Lajos Holczer. He comes from a very poor working class family, a Jewish family that was almost totally assimilated into the Proletarian environment. They lived on the outskirts of Budapest in a tenement without any water and electricity. My grandmother was practically the sole supporter of the family until the children got a little bit older because my grandfather was a, what you would call a lumpen proletary (ph) person who did not really care too much about father responsibilities. The, so my father was the oldest one who made it into adult life, there was somebody else ahead of him but died of tuberculosis. And he has always been a great support to his brothers and sisters. He was a working man, he has always worked for other people. Eventually, he became kind of a, an amateur druggist, worked for companies but he did not have a formal education and after the war, he joined a co-op. He rose to kind of a mid-level managerial position but he basically was always just a working man. He never went beyond the second grade and he taught himself how to read and write and everything else. He had exceptional qualities in math and law. My mother comes from a small northern Hungarian town, Vacz. This is where the Danube turns suddenly south and she comes from a middle class family, Orthodox, very religious. She had a brother and a sister, both of them who died in World War II. The sister was deported, the brother died in labor camp. Her entire family from Vacz were, was deported to Auschwitz and died there. My mother never had to work, basically, my father was always making enough money and she enjoyed just being a housewife. Anything else?
Q: Did you say how many brothers and sisters your father had?
A: My father had thirteen brothers and sisters, yes, and he was the oldest one to survive, to grow up, because his older brother died, very early. So, the burden of supporting the family was always on him. So he was the provider type and my mother had no basic responsibility. She was basically what you would call a petit-bourgeois lady and I always admired my father’s values more than my mother’s but that doesn’t mean I didn’t love my mother. My mother also survived the war with me.
Q: How did your father and your mother meet?
A: My father and mother met, so that, my father was working for a wholesale drug distribution firm. By drug I, we mean a cosmetic supply firm, but in Hungary they were called druggists, making cologne water, things like that. It had nothing to do with what we call drugs today. It was not a pharmaceutical company. And my, at that time, in Hungary and in Europe, it was the custom of middle-class families to send their daughters to secretarial school and then have them work for a few years for some firm, hoping that they’re going to catch a husband. And my mother caught my father there, which was very much to the dislike of her family because my father, they felt, was much below their class and they made him feel that way in all his life. Of course, I cannot really say what would have happened after World War II because my mother’s entire family was wiped out, practically. Only a few people who lived in Budapest remained. So, but I resented them for a very simple reason, that they looked down on my father who I thought was a, was a very, was a man of integrity and, and hard-working, a good human being.
Q: Were they, how did they treat you as a child?
A: I had a very strange relationship with my mother’s family, especially my grandparents because they were very religious and I was born irreligious and whenever I had to visit with them they forced me to wear a hat even in the middle of the summer and eat a certain kind of very strict kosher food, go to the synagogue every night and pray and, and in general, they considered me some kind of a, what they call in Yiddish a shaygets, somebody who is kind of just an outsider because I never really went along with their, with their religious rules. I also resented the fact that my grandmother was kind of a, of a, of a very angry person. I felt that, that the way she treated others and the way she treated my grandfather, I resented that. I didn’t like to go there and my mother, of course, always wanted me to go and visit and I have, I just finally decided to take my revenge so I would not have to visit anymore. And one day, this was, I must have been about eleven or so, I went to a butcher shop, got a huge ham hock and got out and when the people went to the synagogue Friday night, I was eating it without a hat and pretty soon they were reporting it to her and they were coming and that was my last visit. They immediately sent me back to Budapest and I never had to visit again.
Q: Was your mother angry with you?
A: Yes. My mother was very angry, but my father and I, we always had some kind of an understanding. Even when he scolded me for something that, that had something to do with religion to go along with my mother, I sensed in his voice that it was not serious, that he just did it for my mother’s sake. And I also found out since, between 1948 and 1950, I went to Israel, I was in Israel which we will come back later, when I came back and I spoke Hebrew, I realize that my father doesn’t know how to pray, that he just mumbles the words. He has no idea, what really, how to even pronounce them and he did this all for, for the love of my, my, my mother and I appreciated this, that he put up this pretense but it was an interesting discovery for me, that. So he never, he never really scolded me and he was practically influential after the war to put down his foot and say, forget about kosher anymore, let’s just eat what is available. And so we did not have a kosher household anymore.
Q: Now was your father’s entire family not very religious, then?
A: Yes, yes, they weren’t. They were Jews, they never, they never doubt their Jewishness. They knew they were Jews but they were secular Jews, you know? And interestingly, quite a few of them survived because of the place where they lived. Since they lived in a Proletarian tenement of—city tenement—that was given to people under a certain income who had too many children and not enough income, there, the Communist Party, the illegal Communist Party had a very strong hold on this area and when, then, the World War II came and the Nuremburg laws and everything else, some of these Communist leaders, Communist members, came and actually rescued members of the family. I have an uncle in Hungary and he, for example, was a very good friend of a past Communist prime minister who just died recently because they practically lived side by side. So a great deal of the Hungarian leadership, Communist leadership, came from this tenement. So that helped rescue them. The Communists were the only, the only group you could really turn to, during those terrible years that, that would help you.
Q: So, was religion mainly only recognized in your household on holidays, or . . .
A: Yes. Yes. My, my father always talked to me and said go, you know, to the synagogue, your mother wants you to go and all this and that, but he never really did anything to force me to do whatever with religion. He just asked me to respect my mother’s wishes and so I had Bar Mitzvah and that was the last thing that I did. After my Bar Mitzvah I never probably went to synagogue again unless it was a tourist attraction, I just, wanted to see what it is, inside. And, but I never denied my Jewishness so when my grandchildren especially ask me about religion, I say I am a Jew but I’m not Jewish. And they ask me, “How can that be?” And I said, “Well, it’s easy.”
Q: Did you have any sort of, any sense of faith?
A: No, not really. It’s a strange thing that I have never been somebody who believes in the supreme being and so maybe, eventually, my lot, this is going to be difficult, but because they say people who have faith, they die much easier than the ones who don’t, but I always just associated with people who practically felt the same way and it never caused any problems so far in my life, in my sixty-six years. But I can’t remember when I really honestly believed in a supreme being. And then of course, the war probably wiped out, if I had any doubts.
Q: Will you say something about your relationship with your father?
A: My relationship with my father was always very good. I [indecipherable], I considered him always my, my example, my hero, and I was very very upset when in 1942, he was taken away and sent to a labor camp in Yugoslavia. And when he came back in 1945, he, of course, I was overwhelmed and in my memory too, even though I spent more time with my mother, a lot more than with my father because he was also a traveling salesman for a long time and I only saw him on weekends, somehow my memory is much more blurred when it comes to my mother than when it comes to my father. My mother, one reason it might be that my mother died in 1970 and my father died in 1980, so he survived ten more years and since we lived in Europe from ’74 on, at least for six years I had a lot more contact with him than I would have if I had stayed in the U.S. I always considered him an absolute statue of integrity and, and honesty and he was always looking out for my interests and I, even though when I as an American, had a very nice living, I made a very nice living and I didn’t need any, any material, he was still saving and collecting things for us in Hungary and was always giving us a lot of things when we went to visit him and we kept telling him that he should spend it on himself. He, he was just one of the most unselfish people I have ever met in my life.
Q: And you felt this way from the time that you were a small child…
A: Yes, always, always. He was always that way. Just a very simple, very simple man. Very, extremely intelligent, uneducated but a true human being. And with my mother, I always had a little bit of my doubts that she’s not as straightforward as my father. And there were little incidents that kind of, as a child, it’s amazing how it gets engraved in your mind and you cannot get rid of it. And the thing that I was very, very bitter about, that I could never forgive my mother for, was that while my father was in concentration camp in Yugoslavia, she took a little job and she worked for a drugstore in the center of Budapest. And next to the drugstore was an antique store. Mr. Klein was the name of the man who owned and he liked my mother. My mother was a cute little creature and everybody liked her and so he would wait for her when she closed this shop to escort her home because he lived the same way and I didn’t see anything wrong with this, but they noticed how jealous I am of my mother and it’s not that I wanted to possess my mother, I just, I was protecting my mother for my father and so he put his arm around my mother and they were looking at me and laughing at how annoyed I became and this picture is constantly in my mind. And I could never forgive my mother for this, that, that she did not realize how hurt I was by playing this silly game. And she was, still she was a good person, she did everything possible to give me a good education and, but, she had a very petit-bourgeois thinking and another thing that somehow stood between the two of us was piano. She decided that I’m going to be a great piano player and I decided that I have no interest in playing the piano and she would sometimes get so annoyed that I did not practice that she would take a rug-beater and run after me and try to beat me but I was much faster than she was so we were running around the table and then eventually she just broke down and cried that she couldn’t catch me but she had this obsession with, with, with piano playing and so again, ever since in World War II, our piano was destroyed. We gave it to somebody for safekeeping and they claimed that the, the bomb got it, whatever, I was glad. She wanted to buy another piano and I said no. When I, when we came up from the cellar after liberation, I said, that’s it. I am now a man. I basically rescued my mother more than once during World War II and I said no more piano and I never sat down to play the piano. Never. I never had the urge.
Q: You talked a little bit about your relationship with your mother’s family and I was interested in hearing your relationship with your father’s family.
A: My father’s family was my favorite side of the family. I had a grandmother, a typical Proletarian woman with thirteen children and not much of a husband. And I remember going out and loving every moment of spending time with them because here I came, I was the, the, the second grandchild in the family. There was one older one who, unfortunately, during the war, was killed. So I was kind of the sweetheart of everybody and they were pampering me and taking me to places and my grandmother, I remember, had a tremendous knowledge of how to make beans in at least fifteen different ways. There were beans every time I went out, they had beans, beans, but she was just a marvelous woman, a very warm-hearted, a typical country woman. She came from southern Hungary from a very small village and after raising thirteen children during the day, she left them in the care of my father and then went from door to door selling silk stockings just to add a little bit to the, to the income. The, my father’s brothers and sisters were, of course, some of them are only just a few years older than I am, so they were almost like brothers and sisters to me at that time and since there was no money at all in the family, they resorted to somehow, illegal things. I remember I loved ice skating and they said, oh no problem and they took a huge scissor—pair of scissors—and cut a big hole and pushed me through the hole into the ice skating rink, nearby, so we always went ice skating. A lot of things were solved not by very legal ways, but as a child, this was life to me. There were a lot of children in the tenement constantly horsing around and nobody, nobody was constantly bothering me and, and, and disciplining me and getting ahead or going to the synagogue, nothing. It was a great freedom and I just enjoyed it very very much.
Q: Did you have a particularly close relationship with any of your father’s siblings?
A: Any of my father’s brothers or sisters?
Q: Mmm-hmm.
A: Let’s see, did I? No, I really had a very, very good relationship with all of them, with practically all of them. And I cannot really say that one or the other, I liked one particularly and interestingly, I spent the least time with him. He was a, just kind of a very outstanding figure, a tall, very mascular [sic] man who went to Czechoslovakia during the War, World War II and somehow worked for a shoe factory, which was a very famous shoe factory all over the world, Bata, got married there and came once to visit us and I still remember his visit. I was so impressed with him, with his, there was just an air about this man that impressed me a great deal and, unfortunately, when there was the big uprising, there was a big Slovakian uprising against the Germans in 1944, and he was an officer in the, in this uprising, in the Partisan Army, and they caught him and he was hanged. So, we knew this for sure because his wife survived the war, he was a Gentile and he has two children living in Switzerland today. One, I’m sorry, one, the other one is a stepbrother. He has one and I met him and so I knew the story. But, this, this was the man who, to me, was an outstanding representative of my father’s side of family. But, today, there are only two men and one women [sic.] left of the thirteen. I mean, they’re in their late seventies, so, but on my mother’s side, no brothers, no brother, no sister, practically. I only have one cousin left on my mother’s side in Budapest today. He’s younger than I am, so, that’s.
Q: What were your, did you have particular interests as a child or special things that you liked to do?
A: I was an avid cyclist. I loved to, I loved to bicycle. I would come home from school and immediately take off and go, there was a big park, we lived near the, the, we lived on the Pest side and there was a so-called rose garden in the center of Pest and that’s where I met with my friends every afternoon. And we were comparing our bicycles. Bicycles were the same as cars today for us. I mean, it was, it was a thing and we admired the one who had the custom-made one or had just even custom-made parts, and so we had big races on bicycle and then that was it, so I was heartbroken when in 1944, one of the first things we had to take in when the Germans occupied Hungary was the bicycle and the radio. And I lost it. I also belonged to an underground Boy Scout group, I was an avid underground Boy Scout. The reason I say underground because we couldn’t be legal Boy Scouts. The Boy Scout movement, which was based on brotherhood and equality of all, declared that Jews are not equal and therefore all Jewish Boy Scout organizations were disbanded and Jews were also thrown out of those Boy Scout groups that were not affiliated with some Jewish school or something. I belonged to the so-called Three-Hundred Ten, number Three-Hundred Ten Jokay Mór Boy Scout group. Jokay Mór was a famous Hungarian writer, a humanist. He was not Jewish but he was a humanist. And we met illegally, sometimes in the basement of synagogues and then we had to split up later into smaller groups and it was in, in homes, in one, the small groups consisted of about ten, between ten and fourteen people and so we just rotated and did all kinds of things, besides hiking, we were building model airplanes and did what, what Boy Scouts usually do, otherwise. I have always, always dreamt these days, I had always dreamt about one day having a uniform. The uniform was unbelievably important for me, like most kids of my age at that time. And I was always dreaming about it and at school, I just looked at my classmates who were, of course, Christians and could wear the uniform and just, I dreamt about that one day, I’m going to have a uniform and the sad thing is that after the war, when we met for the first time, those who survived in our group, and we went to get the uniform and we put it on and all of a sudden, to most of us, it didn’t mean anything anymore. We were, it’s hard to say, either we were too old or too cynical by that time to really attach any importance to the uniform, so I never wore it again.
Q: Did you attend a secular school?
A: Yes, I have always attended a secular school, except my first fourth grades were in a, the Jewish orphanage ran a school, it was basically a secular school, but the Jewish orphanage was in charge in order to have enough money to raise the orphans. So the orphans lived in a dorm while we who were coming from the outside, we had to pay tuition. And it was nearby, I spent four years there and then, middle school. I went to a secular state school, middle school because it was exactly next door to my house. And then, of course, came the… 1944, and 1943-44, I couldn’t go to high school. There’s one incident in my middle school that I felt had very, very important consequences for the rest of my life. We were, as basically innocents abroad, to the point where I really didn’t pay much attention to being Jewish or not Jewish until this incident happened. In fifth grade, it was an art class and my art teacher was drawing something on the blackboard and we had to copy it, exactly. And then color it exactly. And he came by and for some reason, I used a different kind of color or something and he always walked around with a huge cane, which was not unusual in those days for teachers because teachers… End of Tape 1, Side A Tape 1, Side B
Q: This is tape one, side B of an interview with Mr. Robert Holczer. And Mr. Holczer, I was just asking you about your education and you were going to tell me about an experience that you had that you said was very significant.
A: Yes, in fifth grade, the, the idea of art was for the art teacher to draw on the blackboard and then for the rest of the class, class to copy it and color it. The, teacher came around and made sure that everybody’s following his instructions and just to emphasize that he means business, he had a big cane in his hand and for some reason, I missed a couple of the colors and used something different. He became absolutely just, angry, unreasonably so and started to beat me to the point where I began to bleed through my nose. And I also became frantic seeing the blood coming from, from my nose and all this so I ran home. I mentioned before that I lived next to the school. The other house was where we lived, apartment house. And I ran up to my mother’s, into my mother’s arms and asked her to clean me up and come and basically what I wanted is justice, I could not, even at the age of eleven, I couldn’t believe that this is going to be the way it is. And I wanted her to come in and do something about it. And after she cleaned me up she said, “Now you must understand, a lot of things that you cannot understand now, I cannot go in and do anything, yes, except apologize for your behavior.” And I said, “What, what behavior, what did I do, used the wrong color,” and she said, “Well, you don’t understand just now.” [Clocks chiming] And the reason, what I left out was a very important thing. The teacher was yelling at me as I was running out of the class, “I hope you go to Palestine to sell oranges. That’s where you belong.” And so when I told my mother, this is when her reaction came. So she came back to school with me and instead of demanding some kind of a remedial action for this, apologized to the teacher. And I thought that was, that was a very strange thing. I didn’t understand at that time. I did understand it, years later, that this was the only course she could, she could take. Obviously, she was afraid that maybe they will kick me out of school if she does something else. And every Jewish family, of course, wanted to have their son finish middle school. And that incident somehow frustrated me to the point, it created a mental block. I never drew or never painted in my life since. I am such idiot when it comes to, to do anything with my hands that involves drawing or painting that it is pathetic. When we play some games, for example, with my friends, when I have to draw something, they can’t believe that, they think my perception is that of a mentally retarded person and it is, it is just a, just a block. However, I appreciate art very much. I never fail to go and see an exhibit of paintings and drawings. I just don’t want to do it and I cannot do it myself. Now it’s possible that this can be unlocked in time but by that time I won’t be alive. So, I rather just leave this.
Q: Did you father care about this incident?
A: No, my father was not around anymore. He heard it after the war and of course by that time, I could, I understood the whole situation better.
Q: Was that the first instance of anti-Semitism that…
A: …Hit me for the first time? Well, the first one, I remember was when I was six and I was playing marbles with, with kids and I won. And one kid said, threw the marble down the gutter and said “I’d rather throw it down the gutter than to give it to a Jew.” And I went home and asked my mother, “What, what does it mean?” So, that really was the first time that something like this hit me. And since I went to a Jewish school for the first four years, I was not really exposed to things like this. But the minute I switched and in fifth grade, everything started. Luckily, there were some teachers of course, in our school who tried to make up for this. And I remember a couple of them. Unfortunately, they’re not alive anymore but they did everything possible to, to make our life a bit more civilized. And one of them was even fired because of that. But not everybody was like this.
Q: He was fired because he was . . .
A: He was very protective of, of Jewish children and he was also fired because we had a special subject called, how would I, how would I translate this, Defensive Studies, which meant, basically, kind of a ROTC type, except it was sheer propaganda. We had to, the book contained sentences that were so revolting as far as Hungary’s neighbors were concerned. For example, the Romanians were described as monkeys on a, on a tree, their intellectual level and, I mean, for every nationality that surrounded Hungary, they had a very derogatory term. And, actually, the book was preparing you that one day we will get even. And what he was, among other things, he was teaching this subject, and he said, “Put the book away and let me tell you what life is about.” And it was a very, very human, humanistic lecture that he would give us every day. And, after the war, to our great satisfaction, but not surprise, he was named as the first director of the Hungarian Academy of Physical Sciences, so, he, they recognized him. And he was then, I talked to him later and he was in the Illegal Social Democratic Party, so that also helped him. But, there were teachers and I had a teacher, I don’t even know if he had any political conviction, but he was a human being and he always tried to mitigate any law, anything, but, but as a child, for example, even, even in middle school, I had to go once a week to three hours of, of labor, battalion practice. This was one of the most humiliating experiences that anybody can have. They had the scum of earth in charge of us, it was not teachers or any… we had to report either at school or somewhere on the outskirts of Budapest to a practice ground where these hired instructors that were a lot worse than any drill instructor I have ever seen in any movie, any American movie, because it’s not that, it was not just the physical, the physical abuse can be tolerated, but it is the mental abuse, but that was so, so bad, the way they called us everything, a Jewish this and a Jewish that, and these were people hired to do this job and besides of marching and, and digging and building, constantly, we were abused and constantly even physically so. Many times they beat us and all this. And we had to go there about three hours on a certain day. The Christians then went to three hours of practice of what you would call today ROTC. They had, they had marching drill practices and all this. But ours was completely different.
Q: What year did that start?
A: What year? Well, I was in fifth grade, right, so it was about 1940 when I entered the middle school. It was about 1940.
Q: By that time, had any of the anti-Jewish legislation, I know there were a few things that Hungary had adopted, was that affecting your family at all?
A: Well, yes, in a sense, that some people in the family, such as my aunt, who was very young, one of my father’s sisters, and, was married also to a young, twenty-one or twenty-two year old man. He was called up to go to the eastern front and, and he go into labor battalions, in ’41, I’m talking about ’41 because that’s when Germany declared war, Germany attacked the Soviet Union. Immediately, the very young, I think twenty-one old Jewish men were called up. They had to go to a certain place in their own clothes. They didn’t get any uniform, anything, and taken to the eastern front immediately for mine, got to, to pick up mines, okay? And many of them without any previous experience and, and, and any schooling as to how to do it, of course, blew up. Now, the reason I am mentioning this because my father’s sister who was very young and married to a young man, interestingly, when he was taken to the front, for some reason, somebody made a mistake and his unit was issued Hungarian army uniforms.
Q: This is her husband?
A: Her husband, yes, okay. And he then went to the photographer for something and just had a picture taken, proudly posing in a Hungarian military uniform, he sent home. By the time, the picture arrived at home, he was dead. He was blown up on a mine. And this picture initiated a whole avalanche of events in our family because my aunt who was an extremely shrewd person, used this picture to start, to basic… declaring herself first as half-Jewish, which was an exceptional position then. And as the Nuremburg laws were tightened more and more so, she took one more step and one more step and one more step in pushing this whole idea that she’s not really under this category of the Nuremburg laws. And it, the whole thing accelerated to the point where the last, when the only way she could be declared an exceptional person, as they were called, which means that you’re not considered Jewish, was to take my grandmother down to the police station and that was a scene I remember: her taking my grandmother down and my grandmother had to, under oath, sign an affidavit that she is an, she was an illegitimate child because my grandmother was cleaning house for a lawyer, a Christian lawyer who was dead by that time, a bachelor. And she signed this affidavit which made her a, a Christian. And with a husband who died in military uniform, so he was obviously a Christian, with her mother signing this affidavit that she was illegitimate, and the father was a Christian, she practically cleared herself and then set out to save the rest of the family. And, as I mentioned to you before, she did an excellent job up until 1944, October, that was the point where nobody could do anything anymore because hell broke loose in Hungary and the scum of earth, the worst elements, the so-called Arrow Cross Party took over and ruled from October 15th until January 18th when Pest was liberated.
Q: Back in the beginnings of the war, when there were, did your, did your family experience economic hardships when there were economic restrictions on Jewish . . .
A: Yes. Obviously, everybody experienced this because the men were away and there were very, very few employers who would feel obligated to compensate the family. And so a lot of people were actually either starving, or the mother had to go and look for a job, or if the children were old enough, they had to go and work and do something. We were in a very good position, my mother and I, for a while, because my father’s employer felt obligated to send us part of his regular monthly salary, so we did get money.
Q: Let’s come back to that and first, if you would, tell me how your father was taken away and when?
A: Okay, my father was taken away several times. You know, Hungary was kind of a strange part of that Nazi area because the Hungarians, the Hungarian government has always been in the hands of the aristocracy, Hungarian aristocracy, and the Hungarian aristocracy had no taste for Jews but also had no taste for killing or murdering Jews. They were above this, and so therefore when the dictator of Hungary, Admiral Horthy, had to appoint a government, most of the time that government would not eventually do everything that the Germans wanted them to do. So it was almost like playing musical chairs, I mean, Hungary’s a very small country and you don’t have that many politicians, aristocrats to go around, but almost the same faces somehow appeared, if not as prime minister then maybe minister of interior, or something. So we really, up until 1944, we had a great deal of anti-Semitism, we had a great deal of persecution of Jews but we were not in fear of our lives. Because somehow that was below the dignity of that class. Not only that, some of those aristocrats were very Anglophiles and had, during the war, connections with the British. And so in between, it depended on which aristocrat was in charge of the country. Some of them were a little bit more German-oriented than others. And when, and more German-oriented came into the picture because the Germans didn’t like the one who was in office, then he ordered that so and so is going to go and serve in, these Jews will be taken to the labor battalion. My father was in the labor battalion before he was taken to Yugoslavia but he was inside Hungary so we could visit him, we could take food for him and eventually, when a new prime minister came, he declared that anybody over let’s say, forty-five can go home. So there was no fear of being killed just because you are, you’re a Jew. Up until 1944, March, when the Germans marched into Hungary.
Q: So when your father was called to be taken away . . .
A: To go, yeah, we knew where he was. I remember, he was not far from Budapest for awhile, for a few month, and then almost every weekend we took food down, we talked to him, he was released, we could walk around a little bit. And so it was not the same thing as taken away to a faraway country where we had no idea what would happen to him. Now, there, there, then in 1942, he was taken away for, for good. For some reason, and I cannot really remember exactly what happened and why. We had, probably, a more radical prime minister who yielded to the Germans and let this contingent of Jewish labor battalions go outside the country and he was then taken to Yugoslavia. I remember, even then, they, they were told which railroad station are they going to be going through in Budapest and they allowed them to be there I think half an hour or an hour where we had a visit with him so we could talk over a few things. And that was the last I saw him, then, for a couple of years until he came back after the war.
Q: And he, where did he go exactly?
A: He went to, he was in a copper mine in Bor, B, O, R which is I think the nearest is Niš which is Serbia today, the Serb Republic in Yugoslavia. And he was there, he was always telling me about what was, what was interesting, the various people who guarded them. They had Croats, they had German, they was all SS, Croat, Croatian SS, German SS, Hungarian, not SS, but Hungarian, and I think that they had something, I’ve forgot what, but anyway, various nationalities were guarding them and probably Bosnians. And he mentioned when he came home, interestingly, he said, “Son,” he said, “we never, we never really worried too much about anyone else guarding us except the Croatians.” He said, “We had never seen such beasts as the Croatian SS was.” They called them Ustašas, you know. He was there and I think, I, this is probably much better written than in my memory, I think about one hundred fifty thousand were in this particular area where he was and what happened was when, when the Tito partisans were really pushing them back, The Germans decided to march them back toward Germany and in, in what is northern, what was northern Yugoslavia at that time and previously back before 1918, was southern Hungary, they set up these slaughterhouses, where those who survived the concentration camp ___________ were killed and my father was in the last six thousand being marched and they were captured by Tito’s partisans. And then he was given a choice whether he could fight with the partisans, he could work for the partisans, or they would allow him to go into an area that was already liberated and live there and they would supply him with enough food to survive until the war is over, they said. And he was a very strong man and very grateful that they saved his life and he volunteered to work. So he worked in a flour mill somewhere around and came home with all kinds of documents and, and little medals that testified to the fact that he was a good worker and did his share. And he was very proud of it, and when Stalin decided to eradicate any of the memories attached to Tito, unfortunately we had to burn everything and we had to throw away his medals because it was very dangerous to be in the possession of anything that connects you to Tito. People were hanged all the time without not much reason, let alone if they find something on you. So, he was very bitter about this, and this turned him against the Russians so in all his life he was very anti-Russian and very pro-Yugoslavian. He would have been heartbroken to see what happened to Yugoslavia had he lived today.
Q: Let’s stop.
End of Tape 1, Side B Tape 2, Side A
Q: I would like to ask, you were just describing your, your father’s experience in Bor and I wonder if when he was taken away to Bor if that, you and your mother and your father were recognizing that this was going to be the big one, as it were and if you can recall that separation and what happened.
A: Well, of course we were always afraid that he would not survive and we had no doubt that physically he could survive but we were afraid that, that he would get killed. But an interesting episode was that, [cough] excuse me, I asked him after the war, what, why did he survive if so many people died? And he had a little, just a short little anecdote, he said, “Son, there were two kinds of people in the concentration camp. We got a canteen of water every morning. The one group drank the water immediately and the second group, such as myself, drank half of the water during the day and we used the other half to wash ourselves.” And I said, “Half a canteen of water would make you clean?” He said, “No, but I felt like a human being, I was still caring about myself.” And he said, “And later on I understood a lot more about this whole attitude that I’m not going to lie down here and gulp down everything, I am, even though I am full of lice, I’m still caring about myself.” So that, basically, that was the attitude that saved, I’m sure, that was who survived. And of course luck, because even with this attitude somebody could have shot you if they didn’t like your face or the way they moved. Yes, we, my mother maintained of course like most wives that he’s going to return, and she was right because even though we have not heard from him for a long time, especially the last year when he was there, of course by that time, we couldn’t have heard from him because he was already in the liberated area and we were in Hungary still, in the battlefield. It was, however, just that, that deep feeling that he will come home. And he came home in 1945, I remember late spring, it must have been April, May, probably, and he did not just stop by and said, “Here I am.” He was afraid that maybe we would faint or something like that. He sent a friend up. A man came up and inquired about my father and very slowly kind of asked, “When did you hear from him?” and all this, and “Do you think he’s alive?” and all this, and slowly he said, “Well, I have a feeling that he is alive,” and slowly he led us to this. I remember him coming up on the stairs with a rucksack. The rucksack was full of sausage and potatoes. And he knew that we were starving and so that was it. Now, just to describe the situation in Hungary at that time and how you needed to be, to stay a human being, the, we did not live in our apartment, we were moved, because you could not stay in your apartment. You had to move to first, to so-called Jewish houses that had a big star on them and, eventually to the ghetto. And because of the history of this house, we did not move into the ghetto but this house Zichy street One, was designated as a Jewish house first. So, in the meantime, we moved out of, of our apartment in, that was 1944, summer when you had to leave your apartment. We, the neighbors came, some of them, and said “We will keep this for you, and keep this for you,” and needless to say, that not one thing eventually survived again. Or resurfaced again. They all, either the Russians took it, or the bombing or everything. It’s all disappeared, and what could you do about it? You said okay. But people were in a way like vultures, they were just circling around and see, you know, what they can take. And then the apartment was given, all these Jewish apartments were given to bomb those people whose… Gentiles whose houses were bombed and they couldn’t live in anymore. And I had no idea of course what happened to our apartment. We lived in a street called Rottenbiller Street, 66, and I, my first thing, we were liberated on January 18 and the first thing I went back to see, what, what happened to our apartment because we left, believe it or not, a few boxes of linen there, just when we left. We just, we couldn’t do anything with it, so. And when I came, when I went up there, I had this tremendous chip on my shoulder that I’m going to show these people whoever are there, that within two hours, I said I’m going to give them two hours to get out of here. And here I was a sixteen year old kid, barely sixteen, fifteen really, and telling them, here was a family and I was telling them to get out of here. And the family consisted of a mother, father, a daughter and two sons. And they were tailors. And the old man was quite old, the father, was telling me, he said, “But, but, where can we go?” And I said, “Why did you come here?” And he said, “Well, we have, we have no place. Our, our house was destroyed, and I mean we knew that this is, this was a Jewish apartment, but still it was between this or living in the street, in the cold snowy January,” so he said, “Could, could you do something, could, could we somehow come to some kind of an agreement?” And so my mother came up and she said, “Why can’t we just divide the place between us?” And here it was a two room apartment with their family, four people, five people in their families and two, my mother and I, and we decided that after looking at them and listening to them and all this, there was just something that all of a sudden hit me. My chip was gone and so we decided that yes, we were going to, we’ll, we’ll make it. And so we lived there under the same roof and we became very good friends. And when my father came home in late spring, the new government, Democratic government, devised this plan of each block had to elect a kind of a small council and the head of that council was quite powerful in deciding if there was an empty apartment or, almost like a Justice of Peace. They had certain tasks that they can perform, temporarily, they were deputized. And my father was appointed to do this because he was always very much respected by the people there and the fact that he was now good, you know, with the new regime. And next to us, an apartment was full of old, old women who died one after another. It was a, like a Salvation Army place. They, they rented it and it became empty, so my father got the apartment for them and they moved over there so we could get our apartment back, we lived there, but they could never really thank enough and we, we kept this relationship for a long time and I’m sorry I lost contact with them. But then, we had an apartment and then we faced something else because then the Russians were coming around and trying to find places for their soldiers and so they, they got, they got two old Russian soldiers from Siberia who were quartered in, in our apartment because two rooms were too many for three people. So, and I remember, they were very cute old men, we had no, I mean we had sign language, we didn’t speak Russian and the only incident I remember is that my mother, of all these sufferings, had one little symbol in her possession: a bottle of very expensive cologne water that she kept. And she said, “I am going to start using this after the war, when we are all together and we live in peace.” And so, and she kept it and she had it with her all the time. And so now, when we moved back, she, we got a temporarily, kind of an armoir and she put it way back between sheets. Now one day we came home and my mother said, “This, this place smells like cologne water, very good cologne water,” and she rushed to her cologne water in the armoir but these two Siberians, Russians were very hard pressed to get alcohol, anything, they would drink. I mean, there were stories that I can’t believe, that they went to the museum and drank alcohol out of these scientific lab experiments and—including embryos—but I never believed those stories, but this is true. They drank my mother’s cologne water. They were so, so hard pressed for alcohol. And that was about our only experience with Russians in our house. Otherwise, most people lost their watches. They were very hard pressed for watches. It was a time when nobody in his right mind would walk around in Budapest with a watch on his wrist. They just, they were fascinated. They stop you and they took your watch. That was their, their, their thing. Well, anyway, okay, ask.
Q: So the Russians had moved into your apartment then . . .
A: Yeah, two.
Q: During the German occupation, this was before. . .
A: No, no, no. This was during the Russian occupation.
Q: Oh, after. [talkover]
A: Oh yes. I’m talking about after, this all happened after. Oh no, there were no Russians during the German occupation. I wish there were. No.
Q: I wanted to go back just a little . . .
A: Yes.
Q: …bit, I had, I had wanted to ask you about when you were younger as a child and you were in school, were your friends mostly Jewish . . .
A: Yes.
Q: Or did you share . . .
A: Yes. Mostly Jewish. There were a few Gentile friends who never, ever mentioned religion, never really made us feel inferior, just a few. And after the war, I made it clear how much I appreciated it. So, I’m glad that I could do that. Now, I also have to say that not many of my classmates survived because my Jewish classmates were in a labor battalion and they were working outside Budapest on the day when the deportations came to that village. And the gendarmerie had an empty boxcart and they decided not to let them go home but deport them. So very few Jewish classmates of mine survived. Gentiles, again, the war, the army eventually, everybody who was fifteen, fourteen, fifteen, sixteen at the end of the war, the last few months, the Arrow Cross people, they forced children out into the street with a gun. So quite a few of them did not survive. I really had very few contact with, with, with the few that survived but there weren’t too many.
Q: And you had mentioned that your father’s employer was helping you and your mother out.
A: Yes. Yes. Yes. And my father was very grateful to him and worked for him again after the war.
Q: And so the help that he gave you then during the time that your father was away was enough for you and your mother to… [talkover]
A: Yes. I also took a job. I was a messenger boy up until 19… until the yellow star came into existence… ’44 March. I was a messenger boy for architectural firm. Because of the bicycle. I could bicycle around then, so I was delivering messages and things. So, that supplemented also, my father’s salary which wasn’t a full salary, just part of it.
Q: And as the war progressed, was the next significant event then, would have been the German occupation?
A: Yes. 1944, March, if I remember it, 19th, is when the Germans had serious doubts apparently, that Hungary is not a trusted ally anymore, that Hungary probably entertains the idea of getting out of the war because by that time I think Romania was ready to jump and the situation in Italy was very shaky so they decided to occupy Hungary officially and put in a very right-wing government which was still a lot better than what came in 1944, October. That will be the other stage. But let’s take a look at what happened when the Germans marched in, the yellow star had to be worn within a few weeks, or… So, the labor battalions were more intensified. Now everybody who was eighteen had to go, that was now, they lowered the limit and the deportations started. So, unfortunately, that was the worst thing, the deportations. They started in the countryside, eventually coming to Budapest. They were supposed to come to Budapest, you know, by the fall.
Q: You mentioned that your friends were deported one day.
A: Yes.
Q: How did you manage to avoid being deported yourself?
A: That was just an, a coincidence, that my aunt, the one who gained this special status, said to me, “Please, I just have some very bad feelings, I don’t want you to go today out and work. Stay home, stay with me.” She took me to her apartment and that was the day when it happened. It was just a, just a miraculous instinct that she had. And that is what saved me.
Q: Did life take a turn after that, after the German occupation did you feel, were you able to feed yourself and your mother adequately?
A: Well, what I did was, I gathered, I was always quite street smart and so I somehow found that the best way to do this whole thing is first to get some papers that would qualify us—at least to those who don’t know us—as Christians. So I took my mother’s jewellries, sold it, and bought papers. And the papers were blank and you had to fill it out. And I did that. Also, I got some papers and I fill it out with the same name from a cousin of mine who was adopted but had birth certificate and everything else that pertained to the fact that he was a Gentile. And his parents gave me his papers too so I had kind of this double insurance, moving around, in case I needed it. For a while, I did not use these papers. I waited until, you know, we got the point where it was necessary. Also, there was a danger that until the Russian troops did not cross the Hungarian border, it was a matter of a telephone call to find out if you had false birth certificates. All they had to do is call the principality, you know, and that, that municipality and check, okay? And so, actually, we waited until practically the first village fell and, after that, it was much easier to fill it out, to a town or a village that had, that was already occupied under occu… Soviet occupation because they couldn’t check anymore.
Q: And after that point, did you use those papers?
A: Then, then, then we used the papers for awhile, but it was a, it was very confusing period when we were moving a lot. First, my wife, my mother and I moved to the, the apartment of one of my father’s friends. They were Seventh-Day Adventists. And they offered their place but soon they learned that Seventh-Day Adventists are just in the same danger as Jews so after consultation, we left. Then we were, we went to a, I was always on the street, hearing, feeling, looking, what can happen? Then I took my mother to a Jewish high school which was designated as a clothing supply business for the Hungarian army and it was really a refuge for, for Jews. They were sewing uniforms for the army and it was established by old Hungarian Jewish army officers who wanted to save their skin and their family and hired fake guards in uniform to come in and out of the place, putting on a show and inside they were actually really making, sewing uniforms and delivering it to the army and, and, so I was always, it was just constantly you had to change your position and you had to always look at what seems safe at the moment. And it is possible that something that was safe one week became unsafe the next week because somebody recognized one person in that place when he was walking down the street, going into places, “Here is a Jew, doesn’t wear a yellow star, what is he doing?” And so, your life depended on nuances, those days.
Q: So you just took off the yellow star?
A: My aunt is the one who just ripped off the yellow star and said, “You stay with me,” and then my mother came there, too. And this is how we got to this house in Zichy Jeno Street, One, in the Fifth District of Budapest.
Q: Now, I think before you even moved into that house, there had been a lot of Allied bombings . . .
A: Yes.
Q: Had there not? Of Budapest?
A: Yes.
Q: So where were you during that time?
