THIS IS AN INTERVIEW WITH: HB: Herbert Broh [interviewee]
JF: Josey Fisher [interviewer] Interview Date: October 15, 1999 Tape one, side one:
JF: This is an interview with Mr. Herbert Broh in Philadelphia at the reunion of the Shanghailanders in October of 1999. Mr. Broh, can you tell us where and when you were born, and a little bit about your family.
HB: Yeah, sure. I was born in Berlin, Germany in 1930 and my family lived in Berlin most of their lives. My dad was born in Frankfurt and my mother was born in Dresden, Germany but we lived in Berlin. And… [sounds as though tape stopped].
JF: Can you tell me your mother's maiden name?
HB: My mother's maiden name was Pinkus, P-I-N-K-U-S…
JF: Ok.
HB: …And they were--my grandparents--well, my grandmother, was sent to Auschwitz but my grandfather died of natural causes.
JF: This is your mother's…
HB: My mother's mother.
JF: On your mother's side?
HB: Yeah. But my parent's parents, my father's parents did pass away previous–in the 20's, late 20's.
JF: What kind of work did your father do?
HB: My father was working for a recycle, so to speak, not a recycling place but rebuilt machinery; in other words, they'd take old machinery and they rebuilt it and then they'd sell it. So he was more or less a salesman for this company as my memory recollects--the name was Kohls, K-O-H-L-S, and also a Jewish firm, and, like I said, my dad was a salesman for those people. Reconditioned machinery, that's what it was. Reconditioned machinery, and later, and when people had to give up their businesses before the Crystal Night, Mr. Kohls was also being relieved by so called Aryan individuals, so he can run the business. But my father was still employed with this firm until he migrated to Shanghai.
JF: So he was able to earn a living during that time…
HB: He was earn–yeah, he was able to earn a living and during the time of the Crystal Night or the Germans call it Kristall Night, Nacht--Kristallnacht, he at that time, they were gathering male, all males--not all males but certain males at random and they were sent through the first phase of concentration camps, forced labor. But my father somehow escaped that and he went to relatives in Dresden, where my mother was born, and he hid there until this was over and they never picked him up.
JF: How did he know to escape or had he been warned?
HB: I cannot recall that, but I remember, I was a child of eight, yeah, 1938 that was the Kristallnacht. I really don't know. He had a probably a hunch that--he heard maybe, I think he heard of others. He had a lot of gentile friends and they were telling them that, "You better watch out, Max". His first name was Max. "You better do something. Hide somewhere." That's the way I recollect and…
JF: That something…
HB: Because they were pick--they knew, his gentile friends knew that they were picking up men for forced labor.
JF: And they knew this after Kristallnacht had already happened or as…
HB: No, no, this was before Kristallnacht.
JF: Before Kristallnacht.
HB: Before, yeah.
JF: Ok…
HB: Because I remember, I was a child, I didn't know where my father was going. He was going on a trip. I thought he was going on a business trip...
JF: Ok.
HB: You see. But actually in reality he was escape this phase of the, well it was a phase of first type of concentration camp.
JF: Do you remember Kristallnacht for…
HB: Yeah…
JF: …yourself?
HB: Of course.
JF: Can you describe it?
HB: I was seven years old when they, I was going to a public school in Germany, Berlin, Germany.
JF: Umm hmmm.
HB: And I was the only Jew in the classroom. And I'll tell you, I was seven years old and they kicked me out because I was Jewish and I was transferred to a parochial school. The parochial school was in the back of a synagogue. And…
JF: Do you remember which one?
HB: Yeah, it's the Rieckestrasse, the Rieckestrasse Synagogue, and I was, it was a combination of religious school and parochial school. Well, it was a parochial school, and at the time of Crystal Night, we weren't--I wasn't going to school, that was the night before. The day before, we had school and then I came back. They went home. That same night, I remember when they were smashing, the Nazi's were smashing all the Jewish shops and for these derogatory remarks for the Jews, Jews, Jews and…
JF: Where were you when you witnessed this?
HB: I didn't actually see the smashing of the glass but I've seen the demolished after, when I, the next day when I went to school.
JF: Did you hear anything from your home? Could you…
HB: I, No, no…
JF: …hear sounds?
HB: We were living in the suburbs, so we weren't. We were away from business establishments.
JF: So you did not know that there was…
HB: No, I did not know really, but the day that I went to school, the next day…
JF: Right.
HB: That's the, that's the thing. The day that I went to school, I passed shops that were demolished and …
JF: Do you remember how you felt?
HB: I don't know how I felt. I felt numb. I, because there were some previous incidents, I used to play, where there was a park close by where we lived. It's called, it was called the Friedeichshain Park and I used to go and, by myself. I had a buddy that was not Jewish. He lived in the same apartment building. See we didn't have these, in those days hardly anybody had houses. We only, we lived in apartment buildings, and all of a sudden people, hordes of kids, threw stones at me and called me "Jew, Jew!" And, of course, that discouraged me from going to the--that was very hurtful--because you know, I didn't know really the concept of why, why, you know--Jew, you know. I didn't know the concept of why they were throwing stones at me, and I don't think those kids knew why they were throwing stones at me, because their parents probably threw stones at me. I mean, they told them to, about Jew, they're devils, and, as a matter of fact…
JF: You don't think the kids knew what they were doing really?
HB: I don't think so. I don't think so. They were my age, eight years old, maybe seven, eight years old. I remember we took a field trip when I went, before they kicked me out of the public school. We were on a field trip and--it's funny how you remember, and I still have a school picture, which I don't have with me, of the school where I went to, of the public school, and we went--we passed a Jewish cemetery, and I remember vividly when our teacher said, we made a detour around the cemetery. We didn't go past the cemetery because he mentioned that this is the devil's--the devil roams in these grounds.
JF: Your teacher said that?
HB: My teacher. The devil roams in these grounds. I didn't know what he meant. I had no conception--know what he meant and, of course, then a couple months later, I was kicked out anyway.
JF: Had this teacher ever treated you differently?
HB: No, no, he didn't.
JF: He knew you were Jewish?
HB: Umm hmmm.
JF: And had you, before this time--before this attack in the park…
HB: Yeah.
JF: … had you experienced any kind of…
HB: Not really. No. I really didn't. No.
JF: …discrimination?
