United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Lisa Nussbaum Derman
November 30, 1994
RG-50.030*0300 PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a taped interview with Lisa Nussbaum Derman, conducted on November 30, 1995 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
LISA NUSSBAUM DERMAN
November 30, 1994
01:00:15
Question: Why don't you tell me your full name and your name when you were born, and when and where you were born and then a little about your childhood?
Answer: My name is Lisa Nussbaum Derman. I was born in Raczki Poland in 1926. I was one of three children. I had an older sister Pola and a baby brother Busiek. My parents Herschel and Gittel Nussbaum and an Aunt Sarah that lived with us. I lived in a very small town. We were approximately five kilometers from the German border in East Russia, Ostpreussen. And this is where I grew up until the war broke out. It was a town with not that many Jewish families, 50 Jewish families, surrounded maybe by a 1,000 or 1,500 Christians. I grew up in a loving home, a beautiful Jewish home that instilled in all three of us children wonderful values that really kept me through the years and through this entire traumatic experience. I went to public school as a child, and then I also went to a Hebrew school, and when there were not enough Jewish children for a school, my parents had a private tutor in the house, a Hebrew tutor for myself and my little brother. My father was an exporter. He exported geese and lumber to Germany and he was sort of involved within the German world, so to say. When Hitler came to power, my father's business at Raczki came to a stop. He was not allowed to trade any more, and conditions had changed. We lived very close to the border and we knew really, what went on in Nazi Germany by this time. However, we were not so much yet affected by it. The town I grew up in was antisemitic. We suffered from Antisemitism. Even though, I have to really tell, that my parents were sort of a very special family in this town. My mother especially was giving of herself to absolutely everybody, Christians especially. They would come to her to write letters to America because not that many people were educated and literate in the town. And by the very same token they suffered from Antisemitism. When my father's business came to – abruptly to an end, my mother too had a business. My mother had a fabric store, a large fabric store and there were sermons in church given very often to say not to buy from Jews, and especially even mentioned my mother's name – my mother's name was Gittel but in Polish they call it Gitka (ph) – especially to mention not to buy by Gitka. Shortly after – right after Kristallnacht there was already an influx of German Jewish refugees that came to Poland.
01:04:04 None of them came to my town because we were too small of a Jewish community to accommodate Jews, but however, we heard from them about all the stories. Also, I wanted to be very much aware, even though I lived in this tiny little town, there are people in America call there a shtetl of the kind people think maybe from the Fiddler on the Roof. No, it was not. It was not because we were quite really advanced in a way. We had a radio in the house. We had a telephone in the house and my father in his days when he conducted business traveled very far – traveled to Germany and to other places, and we really knew what went on in the world but very little, because my parents have done at the time to change what was coming? The war broke out in 1939 and Poland was divided between the Soviet Union and the Nazi Germany, and my town, of course, was directly on the German border. And immediately the Germans came and occupied the town. I was not in town when the Germans came to occupy. My mother sent my little brother and myself to my aunt that was only 15 kilometers away. I don't really know what was the reasoning and such, and low and behold, when they bombed the town, my little brother and I had the measles and we were in a shelter hiding from the bombs. And not even – we both had such high fever that we didn't even know what went on. The town was occupied and simultaneously, the Russians came and the two armies sort of met. And by rectifying borders my town remained under the Nazi occupation and the rest, 21 kilometers away from my town Augustów was already the Soviet Union.
01:06:08 My parents had the foresight to leave with the Russians, because the Russians encouraged anyone that wanted to leave with them were able to leave. We left. We took part of our belongings, not everything but part of our belongings and we moved to Augustów, which was a mining town 21 kilometers away. On there we were already refugees. We found accommodations. I started to go to Russian school so that my sister – my sister already at the time was in gymnasium and much higher grades than I was. My sister was 17 years old. And very shortly after – I would not say that I myself as a child suffered much under Russian occupation. My parents provided us with everything that they could. And now we went to school. We made new friends, and youth has a way of adjusting very fast. However, my parents had a much harder time, because my father being a businessman had a handicap under their – the Communist regime. And we had to move away a 100 kilometers from the Russian border. And we moved away from Augustów and we moved away to Slonim, a town which was Poland after 1939, but then in the division of Poland and the Soviet Union – the Nazi Germany and Soviet Union, ended up under the Russians. We lived on the outskirts of town, the whole family. And my aunt that lived with us, Aunt Sarah. We lived on the outskirts of town in Slonim on the river – on the Shchara, and our neighbors were Christians. Predominantly, Slonim really was a Jewish town. It was a magnificent Jewish town because it had so many learning places, so many synagogues, Yeshivot – the famous Yeshiva of Slonim, the rabbis of Slonim, two Jewish high schools. Really, a place that really did not lack of anything one would want to know or really to enjoy in a cultural way as a Jewish child. I had friends, Jewish friends and Christian friends, too. and shortly the war broke out between Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union, and it is there that I really met up with the Nazis.
01:08:57 We lived on the outskirts of town. The town was not bombed much, and we were not at all affected by the war per se from bombs. Very shortly after the war broke out on the 21st of June, very shortly after, there were announcements that Jews were not allowed to live in certain quarters, in certain parts of Slonim and we had to move right away. We moved closer in to the town, and it is there where really the first of 1,500 men were selected and taken on this market place, and 1,200 men were sent to their deaths, very shortly, as soon as the Nazis occupied the town. It was done by Einsatzgruppen. I am sure we did not by that time – the name. We called them the chapones in Yiddish. Chapen means to grab someone, because they literally came; they grabbed men, regardless. Whoever looked to them – they’re of a certain age, young sort of – grabbed them and killed them. My family – my father and my little brother were not affected. They were hiding in a outhouse outside in the house where we really lived. But they did not come even to this part of town. Very shortly there was a law, we had to move again. It was still before the real ghetto was established. We moved again and again, we had to vacate the place because that too was a spot – it was really the center of town, quite prestigious, sort of to say, and we had to move again. And we moved to Podgórna, which was the name of the street. And it is there where we moved that already the ghetto was, even though a little bit larger yet than what it ended up at the end. But it was already surrounded by – loose, loosely what they call – they prided themselves – loosely barbed wires.
01:11:34 And it is there that I witnessed while we lived, still the whole family intact, that I witnessed a massacre. The Germans called it an Aktion, an action. What it means is really slaughter. And I will tell what happened to me on this day. My father did not work as an artisan, as men that had skills. He was a businessman so he only went on slave labor, and he wasn't, quote unquote, "one of these desirable Jews" for a while that did certain, like the shoemakers that sewed their boots or that made their uniforms and such, that for a while yet they need them. On Thursday a sort of strange army came to town, and because the ghetto was so loose yet and you could see the roads on the outside, trucks have been seen and Germans and soldiers – not only the ones that we knew that are Germans, that are the Einsatzgruppen and the chapones, but also auxiliary forces that served the Nazis. There came armies in black uniforms with sort of sleeves and with certain insignias on their sleeves that were Ukrainians. There were Latvians that served Nazis – not all, but in great number Estonians some. And the panic started in the ghetto. What are all these armies invading coming to do in this town? And on the very same day on Thursday, some people returned from work and they received a – it was called, the German called it a schein. It means really, a passport, a tiny little card, an I.D. card that had the person's name and number and the stamp from the Gebietskommissar which would be the equivalent to the governor. And a panic started. Only very few very, quote unquote, "desirable people" received it. The rest of us didn't have it. My family didn't have it.
01:14:14 And my mother, before we went to the ghetto, first spoke to our Christian neighbor, that if there is trouble in the ghetto she wants to send her girls to her. Would she take her girls if there was trouble? And the woman said, “Yes, send them to me.” When Mother had first visualized that there was danger, she really wanted to save her girls. In a haste we were dressed. She took us to the barbed wires and, you know, it was loosely yet. They were not charged with any high voltage electricity and any thing of that sort. Mother took us to the barbed wires. It was November 13th of 1941. I was not quite 15 years old. My sister and I took off our yellow stars. Mother lifted the barbed wires. We snuck out. There were always guard around the barbed wires. All of us already had to wear marking. In Slonim the first marking we wore was a round yellow patch, a round patch in the front of the garment and in the back of the garment, and we took it off naturally. Mother lifted the barbed wires. She stood inside in the ghetto of the barbed wires. We stood on the outside. I turned my head back, and that was the last time I saw my mother because my mother was killed on this November 14th. My sister and I – it was already getting dark. I also want to say that other people tried to sneak out of the ghetto. A lot of people tried to do it and many a times people were shot in the process. I guess you needed some luck too, sometimes not to be shot while you tried to sneak out of the ghetto.
01:16:25 It was already quite – getting dusk, almost dark. We walked very confidently. I knew to keep my head up so nobody would pay attention of two girls walking with their heads down – try to identifying them – that maybe they're Jewish and such, because there was a lot of animosity outside. We walked. We came to the woman's house. Nobody saw us walking in the house. In fact, we made it a point not to walk into the house with nobody noticing us. We came. She let us in and she kept us. She told us to go in the basement to stay overnight. We did. Friday morning on November 14th there was a knock on the door and a neighbor came to tell her that they are killing all the Jews in the ghetto, and the woman became frightened and would not keep us as much we begged her. We cried. We just begged her to hide us somewhere – to tell her that she is no danger – that no one saw us come into this house. And also, a Jewish man had a much harder time surviving because only Jewish men were circumcised in Europe, Christians were not. So this was right away identification that this is a Jew – was a male – was circumcised. The woman would not keep us as much as we begged her. I have to tell you that it was already cold. It was winter. There was already some snow on the ground, and she told us to go hide into the woods, which we were really on the outskirts, not far away – not really far away. We had no alternative. Nothing. What could we have done, two young girls? We went to hide in the woods.
01:18:22 We came into the forest and we stayed for a while. And all of a sudden there were bullets flying all over – flying over our heads, and we ran deeper into the forest to hide from the bullets. And as we came in deeper to the forest we came to the scene of the massacre. It is in this forest that on this Friday, 10,000 Jews were killed in open pits. Shot. Of course, we ran from the scene – the blood, the screams. We ran in opposite direction hoping that we will survive this massacre. As we were sitting there, both of us frightened, shaking, a ranger came in the forest. He wanted to know what we were doing in the forest and we told him that we came to collect some wood for the winter. At first he believed us and he let us stay. He came from the road. He had with him – he came with a bicycle from the road – he had a rifle slung on his shoulder and an axe behind his belt. We were in the forest staying and he walked in deeper. He heard all this shooting. He became curious. He walked in deeper and he saw the scene of the massacre. And he came with a rage to us – that that we are Jewish – we told him a lie. “You must be shot like the rest of the Jews.” Nothing had we done to the man. Nothing. He was in no danger. The viciousness of men. But he didn't take us to the pits. He took us to the road. And as he took us to the road – leading us under the rifle – and told us to meet up with the group of the Jews that were being led to be killed. The women and children were being walked, walked quietly, holding on to their children – some carrying them. They were surrounded tightly with guards. By running out they would be shot immediately. Men were in trucks with machine guns in the back, and as we walked on the little walker’s path, the ranger behind us, at one point my sister turned her head and she realized that he is a distance from us.
01:21:14 We ran from the scene to hide in the opposite side of the forest away from the shooting and the screams. And all of a sudden as we were sitting there – both of us frightened, hoping that we will live through the day – all of a sudden a ranger came into the forest. He came from the road. He carried – he came with a bicycle – holding on to a bicycle, a rifle slung over his shoulder and an axe behind his belt. He wanted to know what we were doing in the forest and we told him that we came to collect the wood for the winter. He believed us and he let us stay. He too, came deeper into the forest and he heard all of the shooting. And he saw the scene of the massacre. He came with a tremendous rage – that we are Jewish and away from the pits. We have to be killed like the rest of the Jews. The viciousness of man! Nothing have we done to him. Why not find the kindness to save two young girls. He was in no danger of anything. But he did not take us to the pits where they where they were killing the people. He took us to the road. He led us under the rifle to the road where the group of women and the children in a great number were being led to be killed. They were surrounded by guards tightly. Women holding on to their children, some carrying them, walking very quietly. And the men on the trucks and the trucks moving very slowly. In the back a machine gun attached to the truck. They couldn't run, they couldn't do anything to change. Nothing at all could they have done. We walked on a little walker’s path that was bumpy, a lot of ice, thin ice. As we are putting our feet – walking, it was hard for even to pull for us to get our shoes out. And when my sister turned her head back and she noticed that the ranger is a distance from us, she grabbed my hand and she told me, “Run, run in the field and run in a zigzag!” And the two of us ran wildly in the field in all different directions. Of course, the ranger in his rage threw the axe in the field. Then he began to shoot at us. As he threw the axe in the field it hit the back of my sister's leg. She had a deep cut. We had to stop in the field. We had scarves. We took off our scarves. We tied her leg and we ran in the field all the way back to the community that we started from.
01:24:24 And it is for you to know that no one would let us come into their homes. No one would let us come into their home. Desperately, we were walking, hoping that we can find a place to hide, a place to hide. We were practically on the outskirts of town and there were no more homes left. All of a sudden, we passed by a house and the gate to the house was open, and there was a barn in the back of the house and the door to the barn was open, and we ran to hide in the barn. And to the side of the house all of a sudden the door opened, and there was a little window in the door, and a woman opened the door and, of course, we thought she would tell us – turn us away. And this woman with her hands clasped said to us these words; “You do not have to tell me where you're coming from. I know. God brought you to the right house. I will save you.” A saintly Christian woman opened up her house, took us in, attended to my sister's wound, gave us food, opened up a sleeping sofa. They took out the inside of the sofa, put us both in, left enough air for us to breathe and kept us there the day of the massacre.
01:26:02 I am convinced I am alive today because someone cared. Someone followed their conscience. Someone had a heart. Someone did what a human being is to do to the next one that is in kind of trouble that my sister and I were. The woman said, ‘God, if it should happen to my girls, please somebody, help them, too.” And in this house there was a father and two daughters. They were exactly my sister's and my age, and while we were lying in the sofa, people, the neighbors came and sat on the sofa, telling her, telling the woman that they are going to search the Christian homes and they will punish the Christians that hide Jews, which is true, they did. They did. But the woman never vacillated. The woman never told us to leave or anything. In fact, she told her neighbor, “This is Nazi propaganda. Don't fall for it. It is impossible to search the homes. Don't fall for it. It is not true.” And at no time at all did she tell us to leave, no time at all. When evening came – was my sister's decision – they took us out of the sofa. And the neighbors – they closed the doors and made sure nobody comes in. And it was my sister's decision. She was naturally the older of the two, the wiser of the two. She said, “We must leave this house in case they do search. These people were so good to us. Why endanger them?” The father of the house took with him a blanket and a pillow and took us to a bombed out house. We didn't stay in the bombed out house. As soon as it got dark –because we were afraid in case somebody would find us. We were not so sure we would meet up with such good people.
01:28:21 These righteous Christians are almost like beacons in this darkness, pointing the fingers at others that could have done something too. There were so few, not so many. It is our great fortune that we met up with a saintly woman that never knew us, never got paid for it, did it out of the goodness of her heart. Following her conscience and would expect others to do it, too. We came to a farm house. We knocked on the window. They let us in. We told them that we are Jewish, that we want to change our clothes with them. We'll give them our city clothes and we wanted to change into – let us give them our farmer’s clothes. They gave us. They consented. We told them that we will not endanger them, that we will stay in the barn overnight and early in the morning we will leave. And they let us stay overnight in the barn. We stayed overnight in the barn. Early in the morning before sun, we started out just walking in the woods. And we knew of a woman, a farm woman that used to come during the Russian occupation to sell butter and chickens and eggs to my mother, and she invited us many times. She said, before the Nazi occupation, “Why don't you girls sometimes come and visit me? We have a beautiful lake and it's nice and we want to really show them hospitality.” Do you know I remembered the woman's village? And we decided that we would go to this woman.
01:20:21 However, it was such a distance in the winter so we stayed in the woods. We lived – we never went to a farm to ask for food because we were afraid. We never knew what kind of people we would meet up with. So we lived on the berry that we could find, the mushroom that we could find and we finally made our journey to this woman's house. She took us in. She kept us there for several days. I think two days if I recall, and she kept us hidden; she was very smart. She kept us hidden and she was a very popular woman, a very popular farm house in town with children. Evidently, they were wealthy so everybody in the farm, all the young people would gather there. So she told the young people when they asked her, “Who are these two girls?” She said, “Oh, I hire two maids to spin and to weave for the winter to make wool.” So, she kept us there, and we begged her if the farmers go to town to Slonim, to see maybe somebody survive. Maybe they didn't kill all the Jews. And she made it in such a way – she was very clever, very clever – she made it in such a way that there was no suspicion that she's hiding two Jewish girls or anything. And she told the farmer, “You know, I used to sell eggs and butter to some Jews. I wonder if somebody still survived.” The man came back and he told her, “Yes, but they killed 10,000 Jews” – he heard – “but there are still Jews.” He saw them returning from a nightshift from work. My sister and I immediately left the farm house and we walked back on foot, back to the ghetto to see if somebody from the family survived.
