United States Holocaust Memorial Museum William Helmreich Oral History CollectionPRIVATE Interview with Joseph Glikman
May 25, 1990
RG-50.165*0032
PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of an audio taped interview with Joseph Glikman, conducted by William Helmreich on May 25, 1990 as research for his book Against all odds: Holocaust survivors and the successful lives they made in America. The interview was given to the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum on Oct. 30, 1992 and is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview. JOSEPH GLIKMAN
May 25, 1990
WH: Where were you during the war?
JG: I different camps. I was in Kaufering, part of Dachau.
WH: where did you live when you first came here?
JG: In the East Bronx, near East Tremont Ave, on Honeywell Ave. Then I moved to the West Side to be near the diamond line, where I worked. I lived on 96th Street. I went to Babat, the Ridniker shul.
WH: What about your wife?
JG: My first wife died. She was from Belgium. My second wife survived by hiding. She’s from Hungary.
WH: Tell me about your family.
JG: I come from a very distinguished hasidic family. They were Belzer and Ropshitzer hasidim. One of my sons learned in Kamenitzer and Mirrer yeshivas and is a scholar. My other son graduated college and finished Harvard Law School. The Bostoner Rebbe told me it’s better if he goes there because all the Harvard students who are religious become part of his community. “Someone like your son,” he said, “will eat in my house on Shabbos; I’ll ask him to give a class for baalei teshuva.” And this is a fellow who went to night school in college only twice a week while he was learning in yeshivas. And thank God, he’s religious, he lives in Kew Gardens Hills. He’s not chasidisch, but he’s religious. He’s divorced, but he remarried to a religious person named Chechik. The children are all in yeshivas. His first wife was also religious, a daughter of the Waldmans from Miami. My second son is married to a religious girl from an important religious family. He also went to yeshivas.....Mirrer, Torah Temimah. My daughter is married to someone who learned in Lakewood and is now a head of a yeshiva in Flatbush.
WH: How long have you lived in Boro Park?
JG: Thirty one years. And when I sit here by my window on Shabbos and look out, I can’t believe what I see. This is one of the biggest wonders and people don’t realize it.
WH: What do you mean?
JG: After the war I met one of my friends and he made fun of me that I was still kosher “what for?” he asked. “Yes kosher, not kosher, what’s the difference?” And after seven years, this man returned to his roots; he wears a shtreimel! So many thousands of Jews didn’t believe after the war....the Nazis has incinerated their fathers, mothers, brothers and sisters, together with the Sefer Torahs People didn’t believe in God. So when I look here and see all these Jews who became religious again, I say this is the biggest miracle. I see the hand of God because something is going on that we don’t understand. The Jewish people are returning to their roots.
WH: Do you see a difference between religion here and in Europe?
JG: Yes. In Europe you didn’t see as much acceptance by women that their husbands should sit and learn. Of course, business was much harder in Europe.
WH: Have you been to Israel?
JG: Seven or eight times. It’s unforgivable what they did to the Sephardic Jews in the fifties, that they moved them from religion.
Conclusion of Interview
PAGE USHMM Archives RG-50.165*0032 PAGE 2
PAGE
