NAME: DAVID CAMPBELL INTERVIEWER: LORRIE MELL CAMP: GARDELEGEN DATE: JANUARY 6, 1979
Q: Your full name?
A: David Franklin Campbell. Q: And the address?
A: 3528 Eagle Rock Drive, Doraville. Q: When were you born?
A . January 17, 1920.
Q: How old were you at the time of the liberation of the camp? A: I was 25 at that time.
Q: At that time, what were your vocational plans? What was your prospective profession?
A: The Army.
Q: You had planned to make the military your career?
A: Yes, when I initially joined the Army, I wanted to be a surgeon, but during the war I decided I'd also like to stay in the Amy and be an Amy officer.
Q: And what is your present occupation?
A: I’m an ad ministrative tax representative for Texaco, Inc. Q: How long did you stay in the military?
A: Twenty-one years.
Q: So you did follow up on your career plans. What military unit were you in at the time of the liberation?
A: I was the company commander of headquarters and service company of the 180th Engineer [unintelligible] battalion.
Q: And your rank?
A: I was a Captain at that time.
Q: You can tell me which camp or camps you liberated and whatever you want to tell me about it.
A: We really were involved in three particular incidents that would relate to your investigation. We had heard of these things as we were coming across Germany.
Q: What had you heard?
A: We had heard that there were these slave concentration camps where some of the people worked the factories. We had come through the Essen-Dortmund area in the Ruhr when we crossed the river. As we were getting on into Germany, we began to pick up rumors both from prisoners of war and from other intelligence areas that there were these concentra- tion camps where there were slave laborers and incarcerated persons, and that we were to be on the lookout for them so that military government teams could get food in to them and medicine and whatever they needed. And it wasn't until April that I observed any of these things first hand.
Q: April of 19....
A: ‘45. We had been bivouacked down at Gettinging, Germany for several days. I don't remember the exact dates. We left there and were sent north to Braunschweig, and it was there that I first saw the train loads of bodies. We were hit by some sniper fire in the middle of town and there were probably 20 or 30 carloads of bodies. Some artillery fire came in and blew the doors off of these trains and the bodies were stacked up, six or eight feet deep. What had happened was the Air Force had bombed the area and broken the rail line, and the German guards had just locked these DP's in the trains and took off. When we were going through, there was some sniper fire. I was going through on the advance because I normally picked out the bivouac areas for the unit and I was near this railway. I seem to recall that it ran right through the center of the town. Then some more artillery came in and blew the doors off. Some of these people were still alive, and, as near as we could tell, they had been in there between five and ten days without water and food and they were just skeletal individuals. Probably 98% of them were dead. But we weren't there long enough to do anything about it other than to send in a report that there were potentially some victims that were still alive there. From there we went on into the little town of Fallersleben, Germany, and there was a prisoner camp that supported the Volkswagen plant that built the Volkswagen for the German Army.
Q: Do you remember the name of the camp?
A: No, all I know is that it was at Fallersleben and it was right next to the Volkswagen factory. We were only there about 24 hours, but when we got there the German guards had run and the prisoners broke out of the camp. They broke open the arsenal, broke into the food stores, and a considerable number of them were dead just from eating raw flour. Near there there was a vermouth factory and they got into the vermouth. A military government came up. I don't recall its number. There was a major in command of it. He came to us and asked us if we could disarm some of these people. [He said] they had gotten drunk on the vermouth and they all had tommy guns and were just scattered over the countryside and were killing some of the German civilians. They set fire to several of the houses there and I think they did kill the town mayor. We got in around 2:00 or 3:00 in the afternoon and they asked us for help about 4:00 or 4:30. We spent most of that night trying to round these characters up and get these guns away from them. We had to disarm the German civilians; they were scared to death but we were under orders to pick up all the weapons there which we did. Then the next day we were ordered on out and we had to leave so how it all came out I don't know, but I can never forget that camp.
Q: Let me ask you a couple of questions. One is, when you arrived, how long before had the guards left?
A: To the best of my recollections, they had been there within 24 hours of the time we had gotten there; but as soon as they left, these prisoners broke out and got to that vermouth factory.
Q: You arrived within 24 hours of that point in time?
A: I'd say yes because we were right on the point at that time; we were ordered up with the 5th Armored Division and the 102nd Infantry Division. We were going for the Elbe River.
Q: When you went to the camp, what did the prisoners do when they saw American troops coming in?
A: They were not in good physical co ndition, but neither were they in extremely poor physical condition. I say extremely poor. The majority of them were on their feet. They were starved. There was no doubt about it.
Q: They looked malnourished?
A: They were thin, emaciated. Those tha t died from eating this raw flour were very emaciated so I presumed that they must have been fairly well cared for while they were working in the factory; enough to keep them on their feet and yet starved enough so that they really weren't too able to resist.
Q: So they were pretty drunk at that time.
A: Yes, oh yes. This was a problem that we had with DP’s from after we passed Hanover until we got to the Elbe River. There were a lot of vermouth factories in that area, and, as the Germans ran away, they seemed to go for it. We passed them all in [unintelligible] down the road.
Q: Do you know anything about the particular population that was in that camp?
A: I was trying to recall. It seemed to me like it was somewhere between five and ten thousand. The factory was a pretty large factory. I really didn't have enough time to investigate much of anything while we were there because we were moving in and moving up. But the Volkswagen plant was a major builder of Volkswagens for the German Army at that time, so I would imagine the figure of 5,000 would probably be closer to it. I know that we rounded up at least three 2 1/2-ton truckloads of arms that we took from these people.
Q: From the displaced persons themselves?
A: Yes, yes. Some of them were so drunk they'd stand on dikes or up on buildings and fire a gun and it'd knock them flat on their backs and we'd just walk up and take their gun away from them. We tried not to hurt any of them; we tried to round them up and get them back so the military government team could handle them, but I'd say that we met with only partial success. They had scattered all over that particular area. I imagine that we screened around a 5 to 6 mile radius of the camp itself.
Q: What were your feelings toward these drunk prisoners?
A: There was a lot of compassion for them, but there was little that we could do personally or individually. I felt very deeply toward them, but our job at that time was still fighting. That was my primary mission. The military government teams were the ones that had to pick up the humanitarian work for us. They were the ones who went in and settled these areas after we had taken them in fighting. I was with the forward elements at that time. And you didn’t have much time to think of compassion then. It was a method of self-survival, I guess.
Q: And then you went on to another camp?
A: It wasn’t a camp. Let me show you on this map here. In blue, this is the area, the actual roads that I traveled. When we left Fallersleben we were ordered north to Ousterburg, which is just off the Elbe River. As we hit this town of Klotz, there were a lot of Germans in the area to the east of it and there was another road that bypassed in there that doesn't show on this map. We could not go through that road because the Germans were there, and we saw fire back in the distance, back to the southeast toward this town of Gardelegen. There was a lot of machine gun fire and some tank fire. So we went on north up to another intersection and again there were Germans to the south of us. We had again to divert north and come across this road and finally get into Ousterburg, where there were some elements of the 5th Armored. Right after we had passed, there was a German counterattack that cut us off and we were in there with the 5th and the 102nd. A combat team of the 5th went back and they got into a tank fight at Klotz. In the meantime, we started to investigate what this fire was, and we found out. Those are the pictures I have. There were probably 500 to a 1,000 DP's that were being evacuated back from the interior of Germany.
Q: Do you know where they were being evacuated to?
A: No, we never did find out. They were herded into a barn and there was a 16 year old Nazi who got on the roof and poured gasoline onto them, and they set up machine guns outside it for when they tried to....
Q: It's difficult to talk about it.
A: They machine gunned them when they tried to get out. [voice breaking at this point] That's all I had. My photographer took those pictures.
Q: It's pretty gruesome.
A: Somebody took some of them. I had some close-ups of where under the edges of the wall you can see, on this picture of the warehouse, they tried to dig out and some of them were caught. They had gotten their heads outside, and the Germans machine gunned them. This is the kind of thing I could see no reason for. It was my understanding that most of these people were French, Lithuanians, Polish, Czechs. I think a few Jewish people were involved. But they had been in a camp, and apparently this SS unit was moving them, and when we hit Klotz there was no way that they could get them on wherever they were going. So they just decided to eliminate them. This report was given in to Corps and I know we sent the photographs on forward. I had my own company photographer and I sent him over and we took these pictures.
Q: Even talking about it today, it still seems to bother you.
A: That kind of stuff you never get used to. We moved in on Ousterburg, and these pictures were taken the day after. We were in Ousterburg about 3 days or 4 days before President Roosevelt died.
Q: So that pinpoints it pretty close.
A: That's as near as I can get it at this late date. Unfortunately, it was after the war when I started putting these pictures in and I didn't have the dates.
Q: That's close enough.
A: These are the little things that I think people don't realize can happen, but it did.
Q: It did. Earlier you had told me about having heard about the camps as you were coming across Germany. Did you expect anything like this?
A: I never expected anything like that. I expected people to be in a prison but not starved to death or beaten or in the condition that we saw them. That was something that was beyond your imagination. We were used to seeing dead people. Dead people are one thing, but people who are alive and yet they're dead is something that is almost beyond earth, at least beyond my imagination. I later saw much more in the Orient, but nothing like this.
Q: Did you have any difficulty after this experience with any nightmares?
A: I was pretty uncomfortable for a couple of years after the war. I couldn't talk much about it. I didn't used to talk much about it the first year or two, and gradually over the years, I loosened up a little bit. Every once in a while, I sit down and look at these and feel how lucky we are that we got
out of it.
Q: Did any of these other soldiers in your unit talk about this at all while you were still there?
A: They were pretty incensed about it right after it happened. As a matter of fact, they went out looking for the kid. I think the 5th Armored picked him up -- the one who set the gasoline on fire. The war ended then on May 8th, so we were there in that area about two weeks. My soldiers were pretty hard-nosed by then, and yet they were not unkind to the German prisoners that we picked up and we were picking them up by the truckload every hour at that time. We were living in Ousterburg, but up on the river at Sandau our job was to try and keep them [the German prisoners] from crossing the river to get away from the Russians, and we were having units as large as a regiment drive up and swim the river and fall in and surrender to the first soldier. My GI's didn't have any malice toward the Wehrmacht soldiers we picked up. They were not quite so kindly toward the SS troops, because this was done by an SS unit. I had a couple in there who had no sympathy with an “SSer” at all. We had fought them all the way across, and they had had some bad times from them and so they never were too sympathetic toward “SSers.” But there was no undue animosity toward regular Wehrmacht soldiers. They treated them under the Geneva Convention. I presume there were some incidents where they weren't treated under it but I didn't witness it.
Q: Did you have any specific orders concerning treatment of the SS?
A: No. Any enemy in uniform was to be treated under the articles of the Geneva Convention. This was a thing that we continually reminded our men. Non-fraternization with any German was in full effect at that time. We very closely adhered to that. They were not allowed to sit down in our presence. We were not allowed to fraternize with them in any way. [We could] speak with them only in the line of our duty, whatever that
happened to be.
Q: What were your feelings about these SS officers that you saw after this incident?
A: I had a great admiration for all the German officers, whether they wore an SS uniform or not. I think that any officer corps of any army is going to have some bad apples in it. It may be that these officers were taken advantage of, the same as sometimes American officers are taken advantage of by some of their enlisted men. Somebody may have panicked. We don't know what happened because we weren't there until after it was all over.
Q: I'm not sure I understand what you meant by taken advantage of.
A: Sometimes a non-com will do something and an officer will either ignore it or the non-com might think he is doing right while the officer knows that what he has done is dead wrong. But if he's a good non-com, normally that officer is not going to burn him over a mistake. You can't afford to. It's a peculiar thing. Sometimes you may not observe some things that happen. You may hear about it later. By the time you hear about it, it's too late to do anything and they are going to cover up anyhow.
Q: You're thinking that maybe that's what happened?
A: I'm thinking this may have happened in this incident. I don't know. Who ordered the 16 year old to throw the gas on them? Who ordered the machine gun set up to try to kill them if they tried to get out? I don't know whether it was a non-com or an officer. All we know is that somebody either panicked or told them to.
Q: But you know for sure it happened? A: Yes, that's petty evident.
Q: You talked about not talking about this for a long time. Right after the incident happened, you didn't talk with any of your men?
A: Most of our officers went over to see it. We all knew it had happened.
We turned the information over. Most of this was handled by the Operations and Intelligence Officer of the unit, and whether or not the 5th Armored was the one that ran the report on it into Corps or the 102nd Division, all three of us were there and we were only a small battalion just attached for river crossing operation. What we did discuss in regard to it for several days was that we were just horrified that a thing like this had happened. And, as I said, had they caught the perpetrators of it and specifically known it, I imagine they would have killed them outright.
Feelings ran pretty high. We had to sit there and smell it for a week. Dead, burned bodies are not the most pleasant smell in the world - it's one you never forget. I think this is one reason why I just didn't care to discuss it for a couple of years after it happened.
Q: You say you and some of your follow officers did talk about it right then? A: Oh, yes.
Q: Do you remember some of the kinds of things you talked about?
A: First, we couldn't understand why people would do this kind of thing. I mean, why kill these people just because they were caught in a trap, that we had penetrated them and there was no getting away with it. We didn't know whether or not they might have done something worse some place else and they were destroying the evidence of what had happened, but it was just a wonderment as to why a thing like this would occur.
Q: It seems so senseless. A: It’s ridiculous.
Q: Now you said that as time went on you began to talk about it from time to time?
A: Oh yes.
Q: What prompted that?
A: I don't know. I guess after two years of fighting in a war, you initially don't want to talk about it at all and then I guess people keep asking you questions and wanting to know. Finally you just loosen up and begin to talk about it a little bit.
Q: Do you think it is important that your wife and your children know about these kinds of things?
A: They know. We were in Korea when that war started, too. She was on the boat that evacuated out with three babies.
Q: I’m making a distinction between....
A: My children are fascinated by this book. Every once in a while they will get it out and they'll want me to explain it to them again, and I have no hesitation in doing it.
Q: Why?
A: I feel that they should understand t hat these things happened, that often times things happen that we have no control over and we have to live with it. Every once in a while, they will bring one of their friends in and ask me to show them, which I have done.
Q: What do you think people can learn from this kind of thing?
A: I would hope that they could learn a lot of compassion and a great amount of love for your fellow man. Whether or not they do depends on how they accept it.
Q: Did you watch the Holocaust TV show? A: Oh, yes.
Q: What did you think of that?
A: I thought that was a great movie. I thought everybody should have been able to see it. Yes, my wife and I were very, very interested in it. I thought it was well presented. There were one or two little technical things I noticed at the time, but it didn't detract a bit from what the story was. I had recalled many different incidents as we went through the Bulge and other places where we saw evidence of the Jew-baiting that was done by the Hitlerites. I saw evidence of the underground and some of their retaliation, like writing [unintelligible]. I think I have a picture some place of one of those buildings where that was written on. We billeted with some people in Tongeren, Belgium who told us a little bit while we were there of how life had been under the Germans and the Gaulletiers over there.
Q: Anything specific from these people that you would like to share with us?
A: Mainly, they talked about the difficulty of visiting and associating with their friends, of various shortages of food, of the treatment of their Jewish friends by the Germans, how they were awakened and deported away in the middle of the night. This sort of thing. Almost right back to your Holocaust story. That’s a very, very good description of what I heard from them. By the same token, I billeted with a family of a German soldier in the town of Filstraf, just east of Metz, before the Bulge happened, and those people mentioned that some of the stories that were being told about the actions of the German soldiers they found hard to believe themselves. As a matter of fact, one family we stayed with had a son who was a lieutenant in the German Wehrmacht, and we were billeted with them for about a week right on the German/Alsace-Lorraine border. They were no different than the average American family, really. They had a son that was in the service because he had been called to serve his country.
Q: And they were saying it was hard to believe?
A: Some of the things that had come out during the war were hard for them to believe had happened. Their communications, I guess, weren't great as far as really knowing what was going on. I think probably they were limited in what they were told. But parents are always more loyal to their own children, so we don’t know. Maybe their son is a fine, upstanding officer doing his duty, which is all he was supposed to be doing.
Q: Is there anything else about your contact with the German people that you think you might want to share with us?
A: I had very little contact with them. The only other thing that I know, the only one that made me furious enough to want to personally kill was a man who had been a taxi driver in Chicago for 16 years and had gone back to Germany. When I was getting ready to move our equipment back to France, I had to go to this rail head and this guy was working for the German national railway. He was a smart-mouth, and I could call him an overbearing Kraut. He kept bragging about all of his knowledge of the
U.S. I finally just about lost my patience with him and I told him if he didn’t shut up and interpret what I was telling him to interpret, I was going to kill him. And he straightened out and I got my stuff moved out, but he was one of the most irritating people that I had met. People that I spoke with primarily were either prisoners we had taken or the town mayor. When we got into a new town, I usually would go to the town mayor and get him to round up all of the weapons, which we were under orders to pick up and turn into ordnance. Again, most of those officials, to my recollection, were no different that an official in one of our own
towns or cities.
Q: They had nothing to say about the camps?
A: Very few of them seemed to know what was going on. In Fallersleben I talked to some people there in the town hall and they weren't too aware of what was going on out at the camp. The only thing they were aware of was that the people were out and drunk and killing everybody and setting fire to buildings. They were in dire fear of their lives and, as I said, I understood. It seems to me like they said that the mayor and his wife and family were killed.
Q: The POW’s killed them?
A: Yes. Those prisoners that had been there drunk and they set fire to several homes. Whether or not they had killed the occupants I don’t know. I don't recall.
Q: Before we leave that and go on to another section, I want to ask you if you can describe the camp at Fallersleben?
A: There is very little that I can describe of it. I was only in it when we first got there. As I recall, we went through a gate, and to the left there was a kind of office building or guardhouse, and just beyond that was a warehouse where they had their food stores. There were several bodies laying out there and the flour sacks were torn open and laying all over the ground. These people had flour all over their faces. Then there was another building. I don't know whether it was the arsenal or guardhouse or what. Then there were some of these shacks with the wooden rack beds on them. I don't remember how many there were or their exact location, but all I can remember seeing really clearly is that warehouse with the flour and the people with their mouths full of it, who had suffocated on it.
Q: Everything else sort of became unimportant.
A: There was a gate in that buildin g, the warehouse, another building -- apparently sleeping quarters. That's all I can remember. The Volkswagen plant across was a 2 or 3 story red-brick building. I remember that. That’s the best I can do.
Q: That's very good. That's a very descriptive thing that you had to say about what you really remember, that one part. Did you consider yourself a religious person at that time?
A: I would have to say yes, but probably not as religious as I feel now.
Q: When you went into the camp and saw this sight that you just described, did you have any conscious thoughts about God or religion at that time?
A: Not really. At that time, with drunks out there shooting machine guns, you think of God before this happens. When it's actually happening, you’re back to why you do everything over and over in training. It's automatic then. Every time we got ready to move up, we normally had the chaplains in and we made our peace with God before we moved because we didn't know what was going to happen two minutes after we moved out.
Q: You say you feel that you are more religious now than you were at that point.
A: I think so.
Q: Do you think this experience had anything to do with it? A: I think it had a lot to do with it.
Q: Do you want to share something about that with me?
A: As I said before, I think that seeing things like this makes you a little more fully understanding of the necessity for love and compassion. And the more you think about it, as you grow older, the more vivid this thought becomes to you. And you get to a point that the more you see of this kind of fighting and this kind of suffering and everything, the more you begin thinking about your God. After I went through Korea, I really felt that I got to know God a lot closer.
Q: I'm going to turn this tape over and then we'll do the rest on the other side. [End of tape. Conversation continues on new tape as follows.]
A: I don't believe it has. I don’t believe the Korean War -- although I was pretty well involved in that for a while -- or the Viet Nam thing or what is really happening now affects my political opinion. I think that it does affect my feelings toward morality and, possibly, religion.
Q: More so than political.
A: More so than politically. I don't agree with a lot of the political decisions that are made. I think they’re stupid, but neither do I disagree completely with some of them. I just can’t correlate fighting and politics, although I know that they are intertwined. The way I've always looked at the job as an Army officer is that if the boss says go do it, then you do your best. I may not agree with the boss, but this is what he says, that’s what you do.
Q: From what you know about what happened in Nazi Germany, what would you say to one of your children if he said to you that he wanted to be a Nazi?
A: I think I’d be giving him a number of good reasons why not to be. Q: Such as?
A: In the first place, I think the first thing you have to do is have the respect for human life. I don' t believe that a real deep, dyed-in-the-wool Nazi ever had such a respect. I think that an individual’s right to do what we are allowed to do under our freedom here in the U.S. is the most precious thing there is. They didn't have this in Nazi Germany. They were dictated to in practically everything they did. A lot of the people over there might not say they lived under that severe a dictatorship, and many of the non-Nazis who existed over there might not have felt they were under too severe a dictatorship, but when you begin to really examine the depth of their freedom, it was pretty shallow. They didn't realize it. A lot of it probably depended upon the attitude of the local Gaullitiers in the different areas. Some of them were strong Nazis, others were weak, and others were just fence-rider types. It also probably depended on what type of production work was affecting a certain area, where they might be more stringent than in other rural areas, for instance.
Q: What else would you tell your children?
A: I could recite to them a little bit about the attitudes of the people. I think I could also work on them in so far as their own personal beliefs and strengths. I think the rise of the Nazis, to a great degree, was contingent on the weaknesses of some of the other world leaders that let them get away with things that they never should have. I think this is the thing that is important to be pointed out to them. I think that many of the world leaders at that time were either pacifists or frightened, but I think there were quite a number of the more influential ones that just didn't want to make a decision.
Q: Do you see this thing that happened in Germany, in relation to the camps and killing of people, as primarily a Jewish persecution?
A: No, I think that probably you would put it on a percentage basis that it was higher in that, but here there were very few Jewish among them. They were importing from all occupied areas people who they felt could do their slave work. They even were taking Russian prisoners and inducting them into the Army. Some of the first dead I saw in Normandy after D-Day were Asians -- Mongolians -- who had been with the Russian Amy and had been captured and the Germans offered them all the looting and shooting they wanted and they'd feed and clothe them if they would fight for them. So it was real weird. I remember some of the troops saying, "I didn't know we were fighting the damn Japs over here." They didn't realize that these guys were Russian Mongolians. Some of these were almost black, Negroid looking Mongolians we fought. And they had quite a number of them in the Normandy area.
Q: So from your perspective, you didn’t see the prisoners that you saw at the camps as predominantly Jewish?
A: No. Most of them that I had occasion to see probably were not. Now those dead in the trains may have been. They may have been transporting them to Dachau or some place else, I don’t know. But this group here I know was practically all ethnic nationalities.
Q: One last question. Do you feel a need to do something today to make sure that something like this never happens again?
A: I do, but I certainly wouldn't know what it would be. It’s difficult to say, but when you get involved in a conflict like this, it's difficult to say what will or what can happen. Things can happen so fast that you react with an instinct. So I would say that it would go back to the way you are trained to do your job. If you basically have good, clean thinking action drilled into you time and time again, that is the way you are going to react under stress. If it's not drilled into you that way, then how are you going to react? Do you get what I'm trying to say?
Q: Yes.
A: Ninety-eight per cent of what a soldier does is because he has repeatedly done the same thing over and over. He doesn't even have to think about it. So if his basic thoughts are proper, there shouldn't be these sorts of things happening, in spite of the fact that you, you might say, can be trained to a keen edge, that there may be some trigger that can go wrong and the thing will happen that an individual might over react.
Q: You have difficulty believing that anything like this could have been done by orders.
A: I do. I really do. The more I've thought about it over the years the more I think somebody just panicked. They may have done something wrong with those people before. A couple of the prisoners that we interviewed indicated that they had been told that the Americans showed no mercy to troops who were involved in this sort of work. I talked to one lieutenant that came out of a unit that had been in Berlin. He came up at Sandau when we crossed the river. He was a good looking young soldier, first lieutenant. I don t remember what unit he said he was in. But he told me that one of the things that their propaganda people had told them was that the Americans had absolutely no mercy with German soldiers who had handled or guarded or taken care of any of these displaced persons. So maybe it was out of fear of this when they knew that Americans were coming in and had cut them off at Klotz. They figured, well, they are going to kill us anyhow.
Q: So maybe they should got rid of the evidence.
A: In thirty years it hadn't crossed my mind again, but this recalled that one incident. Generally, I don't know really what could be done. Things can trigger off so fast. You try not to think about these things; you try not to think about what can happen. Your major job is to keep your unit alive and yourself alive and, based on whatever occurs, you take an action from that point, whether it's right or wrong; I don't know. You recall that Mai Lai incident. I don't know what happened over there; maybe he flipped. I could imagine a dozen different ways that thing could have happened.
Q: You thought about that in the same kind of puzzle that you have thought about this incident.
A: Sure. I mean a lot of times, if you’re under a heavy tension and you go into an area, you know that there are people in there that are going to be shooting at you. I’ve see it almost happen where maybe one follow would step on a stick and break it and everybody would start shooting.
Q: Yes.
A: For no reason. You're just keyed up to that point, and something like that could have happened; I don’t know.
Q: Have you read very much about what's been written since the war?
A: Yes. I read all the time. I've got a whole library down there - everything from World War I on through today.
Q: Is it difficult for you to believe some of the things that have been written about what went on in Germany?
A: No. I read The House of Krupp; I don't know whether you have read that. Q: I'm familiar with it, but I haven't read it.
A: That's an excellent book. He pretty well outlines his involvement. I read a lot of Tolbert, books by [unintelligible]. I enjoy history very much. I'm currently reading five, but I've got about eight that I haven't read yet.
Q: Reading five at the same time?
A: I get involved in one, and I get half through it and I start another one. Q: I'm going to say thank you for this for the tape and turn it off.
