United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Moshe Kraus
November 30, 2014
RG-50.106*0245
PREFACE The following interview is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
MOSHE KRAUSPRIVATE
November 30, 2014 A = Cantor Kraus A2 = Mrs. Kraus
Question: We are at the home of Cantor and Mrs. Kraus in Ottawa, November the 30th, 2014. Start from the liberation. Start from the end of the war.
Answer: I ha – I have here a lot of stories from the end of the war.
Q: Tell me.
A: Which one?
Q: Whatever comes to your mind. Whatever you want to share.
A2: I don’t know, I wasn’t there, so this is not my department. I can tell only after, when you came to Israel, when we met.
A: After the war I – I-I was – and when the English arrived, I-I was – I don’t know – you – you – you know – you know Hebrew also?
Q: Ken.
A: Okay, I can use Hebrew words.
Q: And Yiddish.
A: Yiddish. So, then I offer – because I never had a lesson in English, never. I – only what I picked up. Is after the war, a day before, or two days before, the rabbi, the chief rabbi from Rotterdam, Davidi(ph), Davida(ph), Davidi(ph), I don’t know myself his name, said with me already vidui, if you know what vidui is. Because I was lying on my bed, there already was three beds, you know. I was on the third bed, and they were waiting that I shall die, because I-I was skin and bone, and that’s all – A2: Fifty-five kilo you weighed when you was liberated.
A: I-I-I-I-I was ready. I won’t – was – was my last minutes, my last [indecipherable]. All of a sudden, the next day, I was still alive. I only remember somebody lifted me up and carried me, and all the time he said, British liberty, British liberty. I don’t know what he is talking. Liberty [indecipherable] I didn’t know it is liberty. But, I wa – I didn’t know British, I know English. British is in England.
Q: Yeah.
A: I never was in – in England before – before the war. So, British liberty, and I fell in a coma, and they took me into the hospital, and I was in the hospital, I don’t – A2: Does he talk so fast? No? Okay, sorry. I thought maybe it’s too fast for – to write.
Q: It’s all being – it’s all being recorded, no problem.
A2: Ah, okay. Okay, sorry. Took him to the hospital.
A: So I – I was in a coma, I don’t know, a day, two days, three days, a week, two weeks, I have no idea. I only remember I got up one day from the coma, and two girls are sitting in the sides of my bed, two German girls. Nurses, I understand. And they taking out the – the – the – the – the lice from my body. I was full with lice. And th-th-they died in the – they didn’t have what to eat, so they went in-in the – in the – in the skin, and they – A2: They digged in. They dig. Digged in –
Q: Yeah.
A: And the died, and I couldn’t – I couldn’t take them out. They were in the back, and they were in the legs, and they – unbelievable. They were working eight hours, and every hour another two, and – until they took it off. And the next day comes the Dr. Gottlieb. He was a Jewish doctor from England. He said to me in Yiddish, I must kick you out, I’m sorry. You are not sick, you’re only weak. You didn’t had what to eat. But you must go out, I need the bed for a sick person. And they kicked me out. I come to the door, there is sitting a English two or three soldiers, officers, I – I don’t know myself, I wasn’t – I wasn’t hundred percent.
Q: Can I – where – where was this?
A: In Bergen-Belsen.
Q: In Bergen-Belsen, okay, okay.
A: In Bergen-Belsen, yeah.
Q: Okay.
A: They made from the si – from the –
Q: They made from the ca – they made a hospital from the – from the camp.
A: – from the – from the – from the – I don’t know how did they call it? They call it in German.
Q: Af – well – well, say it in German.
A: Th-The name where the officers were.
A2: Barrack, barrack, barrack?
A: Ah, a barrack, I was in a barrack.
Q: Yeah, the officers – okay –
A: It was a ta – had the name in German. Had a special name. Maybe they –
Q: So they – they converted the officers’ quarters into a hospital.
A: A very big building they made from a do – for – for hospitals.
Q: Yes.
A: Because they needed to take thousands of ca – sick people in then – in the-the – in the hospital. So – and I came with the door. So I need a paper. I go out, and I mu – I must have a paper. I ha – everything was burned. I had nothing, only a pajama, that’s all. Nothing else. So, he asked my name and I tell him Moshe Kraus. And my name also in my Czech papers was also Moshe Kraus. My father was Jack Kraus. My father wouldn’t give me a not Jewish name. Wa – ba – born – when I was born, I [indecipherable] in ’22. Why he wrote ’23, I don’t know. So I’m younger with a year.
Q: Good
A: Yeah. But anyway, some two weeks, I was home. They brought us food. Mama Mia, the UNRRA, the – the American UNRRA brought food. I had not – I have not seen such a food til Bergen-Belsen, and since Bergen-Belsen. Unbelievable. And I was eating, and I was young, and a healthy man. You can see I’m today 93, nobody believes me. If I go up in the bus and I don’t pay the ticket because you don’t have to pay after 65, you’re already 65? Can you show me papers? I’m a show him papers. Because I jump up on the floor – on – on the car like nothing. Some few weeks later, I find out that they give in Bucharest 130,000 lai(ph) every – every DP, displaced person.
Q: Yeah, yeah.
A: Every DP gets 130,000 lai(ph). I didn’t need it 130,000 lai(ph), because I was straightaway announced the secretary of the chief rabbinate, because my German is very perfect, and they needed somebody who had the knowledge, and I have the knowledge, I’m a rabbi. I never was a rabbi in a position –
Q: But you –
A: – but I have the title – the title. I was 16 years old and I got a title. It was a sensation in – in – in the city, in Munkacs. Don’t know if you heard from Munkacs, a very famous Hassidic city, the number one city in the world before the war. Hassidic city. So, I-I-I told them ’22, and he wrote ’23. I don’t know, possible I said it wrong. I don’t blame him, but I didn’t care. I was thinking I come home, I will go in in the city hall, and I’ll take my same birthday and I will have my own original birthday, and I’ll be changed. I came home, and there was no city hall. Burned everything, the Russians burned everything. I had to wait two, three days, I don’t want – didn’t want it to wait. I take the car and went back to Budapest. But on – anyway, after a few weeks, possibly a few months, I don’t remember really, I heard that they give hundred thousand – 130,000 dollars for every DP, I will go there and get it. But I didn’t meant what so much for the money, because I told you I straightaway – you know what 500 dollars was a month? I got salary 500 dollars a month.
Q: Wow.
A: You know, and in ’45, you know. And it was like – li-like 5,000 dollars, I don’t know.
Q: Yeah.
A: I couldn’t spend it. Impossible. But I didn’t care for the position. I cared to –
Q: This was in Budapest?
A: Yeah, it was in Bergen-Belsen.
Q: Oh.
A: To fi – to – I wanted to find my family, and my father and my mother, my brothers, my sisters. I wanted to find them. I couldn’t find them. Excuse me. Anyway, I went to Bucharest. I went to Bucharest. I went to the train. There was no train. Th-Th-There – nobody know where the train goes. People were standing, thousands of people, everybody wanted to go home. And I say also. So I went on the train, on the deck of the train. And I wasn’t stupid, I stood in the middle. Because from the sides they used to – they used to fell down. All of a sudden arrived the train, I jumped up and I – I didn’t have where to go. Where she will go, I go. I want to come to Bucharest. So we went to the border, Czechoslovakia – Germany. And from there I went to Hungary, and from Hungary I went to Bucharest, and to make story stor – short, when I arrived and I came there to the Joint, he wanted to give me 130,000 dollar. I asked him, how much is this in dollars? Hundred and thousand lai(ph).
Q: Yeah.
A: How much is this in dollars? In dollars it is 200 dollars. Keep it. I wouldn’t take it. I didn’t need it. I took with me money. I took with me some thousand dollars, who needs it. And I got a spare room in the hotel from the – from the Joint, so – but what happened, these papers –
Q: Can I just clarify? Cause before you said Budapest, and then you said Bucharest. You wanted to go to Bucharest.
A: No, I want to go to buch – to Bucharest.
Q: Buchar – in Romania.
A: No, but I ran to Budapest with the train, and –
Q: For – and then to get to Bucharest.
A: And they – and they – and then there from Budapest –
Q: Okay.
A: – I got to Bucharest.
Q: Bucharest, okay.
