-TITLE- ERIKA JACOBY & MALVINA ENGEL
-I_DATE- -SOURCE- UCLA HOLOCAUST DOCUMENTATION ARCHIVES
-RESTRICTIONS-
-SOUND_QUALITY- EXCELLENT
-IMAGE_QUALITY- EXCELLENT
-DURATION-
-LANGUAGES-
-KEY_SEGMENT-
-GEOGRAPHIC_NAME-
-PERSONAL_NAME-
-CORPORATE_NAME-
-KEY_WORDS-
-NOTES-
-CONTENTS-
15:01:27 Interviewer: Who would like to start and give us a frame of time and place?
Engel: You ask and I will answer.
Interviewer: How old were you in 1936?
Engel: I was 35 years old.
15:01:48 Interviewer: So what was happening then?
Engel: What was happening? It wasn't new, the anti-Semitism because it was always there. It started with the children's education.
Interviewer: How old was Eriks then?
Jacoby: In 1935, I was seven.
Engel: But not with my children education at --. They didn't take the Jewish children to colleges.
15:02:24 In high school, they still could go, but not to colleges.
About six percent of the students could be Jews at this time, but they didn't go because they didn't feel good. So they had to go to
other countries.
Interviewer: The Jews?
15:03:14 Engel: The Jews. They went to Italy. They went to Czechoslovakia. They wanted to become doctors, lawyers or
something.
Interviewer: And you had one boy older than Erika and one younger?
Engel: But it doesn't matter because I wouldn't send anyone to
college.
15:03:49 Then they started with the licenses for the Jewish businessmen. Everybody had to prove that they were really Hungarian born. At this time already, it wasn't all Hungary. When my parents and grandparents were born,
15:04:13 Hungary was very big. When fascism came, it was declared separate states. So my father had to go and look for his birth certificate. It was in another part of the country. It
15:04:43 belonged to Czechoslovakia. It was very hard to get it because you had to have witnesses. His witnesses were all very old.
They couldn't remember anything. So it was very hard. Of course, a lot of bribery and
15:05:03 a lot of money could get this. Even with that it was very hard because they took all the money and they didn't do anything.
15:05:43 Interviewer: You were telling us earlier about your father. Do you want to talk a little about him ?
Engel: My father. He was a well-to-do man so we didn't feel too much of the anti-Semitism because they were dependant on him. He had 400 workers in
15:06:06 his coal mine. Almost the whole town was not much more than this because it was at this time about 3000 or 4000 people. So they were dependant on him. Later on, in '18 after the revolution when they took everything away, all these people who he
15:00:46 brought home from the front in the First World War came in and said. Look, the mine is ours and you ___ Interviewer: They nationalized your mine.
15:07:16 Engel: So then we saw the real nature of these people.
Later on, it wasn't so bad because people got used to the changes.
In the first days of the revolution, everybody was mad. But it calmed down a little. They accepted that, in this little city, they can't do anything without the Jew. They never went to school. They didn't know how to write their
15:08:06 names. They couldn't do anything. They needed the Jews.
so it was a little easier. Only it was not good because every three or four months, there was another government. But with the people, it wasn't so bad.
Interviewer: We were talking before about the envy and the anti-
Semitism.
Engel: The anti-Semitism was always there. We went to Jewish
schools beaus there
15:08:35 was no public school. There was the Catholic, the Protestant and the Jewish.
So they hated each other. The Catholics hated the Jews and they hated the Protestants. The hated each other and they both
15:08:55 hated the Jews. So it was always there. When children went on the street, the Gentile children always said" This is Jew. This is Jew." And maybe they throw a rock. But you got used to it because everything came only from the people not the government. In this little city that was dependant on the Jews, the
15:09:35 government was dependant on the Jews too. You remember all these stories from Germany about how they were always dependant on the Jewish money. It was so in Hungary too. So the anti-Semitism
didn't
15:09:56 come out. Even if they ware anti-Semites, it didn't come out in the open against us.
Interviewer: How were you experiencing it later, Eriks, as a kid?
Jacoby: Well, I remember as a child that I was always afraid of the
non-Jews.
15:10:21 I grew up in the city of Miskolz?) My brothers went to ...?) and they had these little pairs. I remember that they were going to school during the day. That was alright. But in the evening, our maid always had to go and fetch them because
15:10:33 they would be beaten up on their way home. In the morning too. When I went to Eddering(?) where my mother was born, there was a very interesting relationship with the non-Jews. I was allowed to
play with
15:10:55 them, but I knew that there was something in between us that we could never talk about. I wasn't sure what it was. I remember not understanding why I was not as free or good as they
were although
15:11:11 they looked worse than I did. As a child, that was a very confusing thing for me. I didn't understand the distinction and on what basis there was a distinction between us. I also knew, for example, exactly how to behave with them. I knew what I could do, in whose house I could go and whose house they would throw me out or not welcome me. Also, I remember stories about the (cher?)
15:11:41 non-Jews. I remember the words being used: "Oh, he's a rocher(?) It means he's a wicked man. I remember trying not to pass in front of his house because as children, we were affected by these words. We didn't understand exactly what could be done to us, but we knew that if there was somebody who was a rocher(?) , perhaps we couldn't even pass
15:12:05 in front of his house. Something terrible might happen to us. The thing I most clearly remember has to do with the Church. I remember that there was a real frightful experience: the Easter.
We were very
15:12:25 frightened. We were told not to go outside because something could happen to us. We didn't quite know what. As I think back, all the beautiful pageantry of the Church becomes very hateful to me. There was danger lurking behind those pageantries.
I couldn't understand because synthetically, it was beautiful. I couldn't understand how that could hurt me.
15:13:04 Christmas also was a very frightening experience for me.
Mainly because we didn't understand the connection. Nobody sat down with us and explained what might happen or why there are those feelings. So I think children were not paid much attention to.
Interviewer: Was there a reason?
15:13:28 Engel: I didn't feel these things that she felt because when I was at home, I felt independent like my father. I was in business with my father. I had to deal with all these people and they were really dependant on my. They had to get a loan. They had to buy something on charge. So they were dependant
15:14:02 on my father and dependant on me. So I didn't feel these things. When I went on the street, I felt that I was more than they were. They wouldn't dare say a word that I wouldn't like because they knew that I could do something for them back. It was already the march of fascism. She didn't belong already. She was already
the third generation.
15:14:47 But I didn't feel these things because I thought that I am more and you depend on me. I didn't feel bad when I went into the priest and I told him... My father wouldn't know about it, but there was a young priest who I would sit down with. I told this young priest what I wanted to tell him. I wasn't
15:15:18 afraid of him. I had this strength because it was my background that made me strong.
Jacoby: I remember when we had restaurant in Miskolz(?) . During the night, we usually put down a heavy iron grate or curtain. That covered all the window. They used to come at night and bang on
15:15:52 the . . Our house was attached to the restaurant. They used to bang on them and call," Dirty Jew." Open up. I don't know how real the danger was, but I remember being very frightened. My father was very frightened too. My mother wasn't so frightened.
15:16:18 She went to the kitchen and took out the long knife and she said "Nobody's going to come in here" She was standing there with that long knife at the door and if anybody would dare come in... Now, I don't know if she would have done anything, but those were very frightening times.
Later on, when things got worse as I grew older, I remember mostly how we were kind of ostracized from other people. That was mostly in Miskolz(?) . I remember that we had a neighbor, an older
15:16:59 man. He didn't allow us to come near his house. "Dirty Jewish kids! Keep away from my place" We used to be so scared of him. He used to yell at us. We never dared to cross in front of his house. What happened, and it really has a very sad ending, was this man himself was a third generation convert.
15:17:27 His grandfather was a Jew. He was transported to Auschwitz in the same cattle car that I was. I never forgot that.
Interviewer: So who brought you up to 1944.
15:18:14 Jacoby: The other neighbors... for example, we lived in an apartment building and upstairs there was a Catholic family. They had a son about my age. I
15:18:30 very much wanted to be his friend. I would have liked to visit him especially when it came to be Christmas. I went up and I wanted to look in at their Christmas tree. I had great envy of the little colored candies that were a Christmas decoration. I
15:18:55 wanted so badly to have one. I wanted to go in to say hello to them. The boy noticed that I was lurking around their room and came out and said "I can't talk to you. My mother told me I can't talk to you. You are Jewish"
15:19:13 By than, of course, I understood, but it was a real pain.
I just couldn't understand why. I understood that because I was Jewish, but I didn't understand why I wasn't okay to talk to.
15:19:31 I remember one of the neighbors of my girlfriend whose house we went to play at. The neighbors kids also played with us.
The neighbors kids were sent to get some bread from the Jewish bakery. They brought it home and then sliced the
15:15:57 bread and took the crust off each slice. I said to the lady "Why do you take the crust off? My mother says that's very healthy" So she said "That's because the Jews touched it. We can't eat it if the
15:20:14 Jews touched it" So these were the things that I'm sure affected me and gave me the kind of image about myself that something must be terribly wrong with me. In contrast to my mother who never felt there was something wrong with her, I always felt
there
15:20:32 was something wrong with me. I couldn't understand why. I always tried very hard to be a good girl and the best student I could be, but still I wasn't good enough.
Interviewer: At that point, you were still in school?
Jacoby: I was still in school. I went to a Jewish elementary school and then to a Jewish junior high school which was a community school. It was a very good school. From that school,
15:21:03 children who graduated either entered a teachers'seminary which was also a Jewish community school or they would go to a non- Jewish school like a commercial high school if they could. By the time I graduated from junior high, there was no opportunity for me to go on to any other school. Although I was a very good student,
I
15:21:33 was not able to go on studying any more. I felt very betrayed about that. I thought that if I studied hard, I could do something, but I couldn't.
Interviewer: What did you want to do? What was your dream?
Jacoby: I didn't want to do business; I grew up in a business family. I wanted to be some kind of a professional. I didn't know exactly what, but I knew I wanted to study. My brothers were sent to Yeshivs(?) and I was envious of them. Probably I
15:22:12 wanted to study something about the Jews. I was very interested in that. I also wanted to compete with the boys. I wanted to be as good as them. I don't remember if I had any definite goals, but I knew that I wanted to study. Studying was
very important.
Interviewer: Was this okay with you and your husband?
15:22:38 Engel: Yes beaus I always wanted to study my whole life.
My father agreed that I could study what I wanted because he trusted me and he loved me very much. Of all the children, I can
say that he 15 22:59 loved me the most and he trusted me the most. I never wanted to stay in businsss either. I wanted to study. I asked to study. So, I didn't mind her. The boys we minded because we wanted them to be reading a lot about religion. We wanted them to know a lot of Talmud. It was much harder to study the Talmud than to study
for a lawyer.
Interviewer: You mentioned before that your father was convinced that you wouldn't go away from the religion and you were convinced that Erika wouldn't go away from the religion.
Engel: Yes. Because they were growing up and there weren't public schools so there wasn't a mix of the
15:24:03 students like here.
Jacoby: Every family wanted their children to be educated. The boys of course wanted their children to have a lot of Jewish studies.
15:24:25 Interviewer: Then as the war came on and you were struggling with that, school stopped?
Jacoby: Yes. All the schools were stopped. There was no more Jewish education or any education for children. Jewish children were not accepted anymore to the Catholic or Protestant high schools.
15:24:51 Interviewer: Were you hearing what was going on in Germany and Poland? What did you know?
Jacoby: I had very little factual knowledge. I only had impressions. I remember when some of the refugees arrived and we heard stories about how their families were
15:25:52 killed. There was one evening when we had a wedding for a rabbi who escaped whose whole family was killed. He remarried in Hungary. I remember that we had to hide him in our house. We
15:25:35 made a kind of underground wedding for him. I remember how impressed I was about the danger of that. We heard the stories about Hitler. I must have been very young. We fabricated stories of heroism, what we could do to Hitler. I remember how we
15:25:57 tried to outdo each other. "I would do this" And the other would say "No, I'm going to do this." We kept boasting about our courage and how we would deal with this man. Of course, there were Hitler jokes and things like that coming from the synagogue. My brothers would come home every night with a new joke about how we were going to overcome Hitler.
15:26:23 The fear of Hitler was among us all the years while the stories went on, but I don't think that I had an actual, factual knowledge of what was really happening. You probably did.
15:21:41 Engel: In the first years when Hitler came up, we were so Hungarian that we ware really angry with the Allies that they took away from Hungary the tutors(?) and took away from Germany the rule. We were really angry. Four years we were in the war
15:27:07 and they took everything away. So first we really didn't mind what he did because the Versailles Peace Treaty wasn't right.
We felt this way as Hungarians. We were more Hungarian than Jew.
Later when he came out with all these laws against the Jews, we
started to
15:27:45 think that this is against us and not against the allies.
Interviewer: But you still felt safe?
Engel: I felt safe.
Jacoby: Until when?
Engel: Until he wasn't in Hemuskolz(?) .
Jacoby: Do you remember your brother who was studying in
Preshbourg(?) ?
15:28:11 Engel: Not in Preshbourg(?) , in Austria.
Jacoby: In Austria. He came home and told us about what was happening. What happened then? You didn't believe him?
Engel: Nobody believed him. He came home and said that the Germans came into Vienna. They threw
15:28:32 people out of the Viendorz(?) . His rabbi's wife had to clean the street. All kinds of things. So in the restaurant(?) , people said to him "You know, you'd better not say these things because you can get in jail" But he believed this so after half a year, he wasn't in Heinrick(?) . He told everybody and nobody wanted
to believe it.
15:29:12 Interviewer: Where did he go?
Engel: To Mexico. He went to all the lands. He went to Greece. He went to Italy. He went everywhere until he got out of Proportagard(?) in the last ship to Mexico. But nobody wanted to believe him. It was
15:29:30 already 1941.
Jacoby: so interesting to hear this because, Engel: Because we had Horty(?) . We believed so in Horty.
Interviewer: Admirer Horty.
Jacoby: But what about your brothers? Your brothers were old and taken into the working camps already
5:29:50 why before Hitler came in. What did you think?
Engel: Because in the first years in 1939 when they first took my older brother, after a year he came back. So we thought that when they took the other ones out, they want come back too. But nobody
came 30:00 back. I don't know why we couldn't believe it. We saw already that these Jews who came in 50 years ago from Gardisia(?) , from Poland... They had already grandchildren there and they had businesses there. One day came that everybody had to go and register and they took all of the men away. We didn't
15:30:48 know where they were. They took the men to Poland.
15:31:01 Interviewer: So you didn't recognize that this was different? This wasn't just like conscription into the army.
Engel: We were very backwards in Jewish leadership.In Budapest, the big ones, they knew already. They knew already, but didn't know it in 1944 when Eichmann(?) came in because until 1944, nobody left Budapest either. They went only when they
15:31:44 were taken by Eichmann(?) . They didn't go before.
Jacoby: I think that there was a terrible ignorance and denial on the part of the Jews. It is incomprehensible. I don't know what we could have done because even those who tries to escape couldn't get visas. We couldn't get out. We didn't have many
15:32:12 friends. We couldn't really hide, but I'm sure we could have done more than what we did.
Engel: But if you went somewhere, you had to eat. Nobody would serve you anything to eat any where. This was the main reason why people didn't go. You didn't have anything to look forward to. You had children and you had to eat, you had to sleep somewhere. Where
can you go?
15:32:43 Interviewer: Was there already much hunger in 1940, '41,
'42?
Jacoby: Rations, yes. I don't know if there was hunger. I remember we couldn't get flour or oil or we had to go somewhere to pick up
these things even
15:33:05 potatoes.
Engel: But you weren't starving.
Jacoby: It wasn't starving. It wasn't like in the ghetto or
anything like that.
Engel: Until 1944. In 1944 when Hitler came in, you couldn't buy anything. We gave away all our clothes. In the night, a peasant woman came and brought the chicken and we would give her what we
had. In 1944
15:33:33 after Hitler came in.
Interviewer: Was that then a closed ghetto?
Engel: Yes.
Jacoby: See, everything that happened in the other countries that took years in terms of the ghetto and the deportation...
Engel: This took six weeks.
15:33:52 Jacoby: The whole thing went very fast.
Engel: Six weeks.
Jacoby: As a matter of fact, that's the tragedy of the Hungarian
Jews.
Engel: Half a million Jews they took in six weeks.
Jacoby: But the Hungarian Jews could have probably been saved already because Hitler was losing the war. He was willing to negotiate and had they bombed the
15:34:15 railroads, they could have been saved. As Elie Wiesel said, 100 people a day were killed at that time. So that is a real
tragedy.
Interviewer: But Hitler had sent Eichmann in?
15:34:36 Jacoby: Yes.
Interviewer: It's very deliberate.
Jacoby: He was the one who was in charge of the deportation of the
Jews.
Out here were some Hungarian leaders who were able to buy themselves out and escape. Of course, there was a lot of turmoil about this among the Jews.
15:35:20 Interviewer: Some sense of betrayal.
Jacoby: Yes. Also after March 19th when the Germans physically marched in...see until then I remember the debates. 'there not going to come in. They're not going to come into Hungary. We are cooperating. We are good Nazis. That's what they said. "Hungarians are good Nazis. They're not going to have Germany occupy the country. So we believed them. Although we're going to have a hard life or we are discriminated against or we are beaten. My brother was beaten most every day because
15:36:00 he had to go to something like a youth group where they were taken out and given military training, but after each training, they were beaten. That's how they were sent home. My uncles were in these forced labor camps attached to military camps.
But all these things we were kind of coping with. We were still in our home. No Germans were present until March 19th.
Engel: You know who? Because in the government, there were still ministers who didn't like the Jews, but they were m___. They didn't
want to deport
15:36:49 the Jews from Hungary. Until we had a minister named Kar(?) and they killed him. After him came another one and they gave up to the Germans.
Interviewer: So until this time, the family was still intact?
15:37:17 Jacoby: Yes. Except my uncles were taken into forced labor camps. On March 19th when the Germans marched in, my brother who was at that time 17 or 18 went to a football game in Budapest.
He loved football. On his way back on a train ride, he was caught
in a raid.
15:37:48 That was the very day when they marched in.
Engel: They caught all the Jews on the trains.
Jacoby: They arrested him and he didn't come home. So we didn't know what happened to him. He disappeared at that time. We tried to figure out what happened. They said that they were arrested.
They were here, they were there. Later we heard that they were taken to Auschwitz, but we didn't hear that until after the war
15:38:19 Engel: No. When we arrived at Auschwitz and he gave us the number, he said I gave your brother a number a few days ago, but they sent him away already someplace else.
Interviewer: You never saw him again?
Engel: No, he survived.
Jacoby: Then my father was taken to a forced labor camp. He left a little before Shavor(?) . I remember 15:38: seeing him. My father was very gentle and not a real hero, macho type. I was very worried about him. I remember his skin was always so white. I knew at that time that he couldn't survive. He just wasn't physically strong.
Engel: Physically strong, he was, but he just wasn't strong in feelings. He was always scared.
15:39:25 Jacoby: He was also saying that people started to convert.
One after the other. They thought they could save themselves. My father said,"People without any inner strength" He couldn't understand how they could give up their religion. But as I said, when he packed this bag on his
15:39:50 back and said goodbye, I had the feeling that I would not see him again. He didn't look like a man who could survive. My younger brother, Moshe, went to Edder.ng(?) where my grandparents were at the time. We thought he would be safer there. And they took him from there. He didn't survive. He died of typhus just a week
before the liberation.
Interviewer: What about your grandparents?
15:40:31 Jacoby: After the Germans came in, they made a Ghetto out of our street and a few more streets so that all the Jews who lived in Mishkolz(?) , we were about 10,000 maybe more, all came to live in that confined areas. We had several families living with us.
During that time, I was allowed to go out to work.
They said, who can go to work can go to work.
Engel: We knew already that they would take us to work somewhere.
To Poland they told us. But who has work at home, they would leave.
So she went to
15:41:26 a farmer to work.
Jacoby: And I was able to get some food through the farmer. In June at this time, there were bombings probably by the Russians. We spent a lot of time in the basement where we had a shelter. I remember that so much happened there that had nothing to do with the war and had to do with
15:42:07 my age. I remember that was the first time I met a young man that I liked. I remember feeling wonderfully happy down in the shelter. And excited. And waiting to see him in the shelter. That was my big adventure. Another thing that is so incongruent as I think back is that the family who moved in with us had more money than we did. By then we had very little
15:42:39 because our business had been closed about a year already.
These people moved in and brought butter. They gave bread and butter to their little kids and I was dying to get a piece of bread with butter, but I was ashamed to ask for it. So I never did. I remember that I could see and smell the butter, but I couldn't ask for it. It was too hard. Then after a few weeks, they told us that
we
15:43:13 should pack our stuff together. Whatever we could carry on our backs. We would be transported to another area outside the city which was the brick factory. There was no factory there. There were shelters for the bricks with roofs, but nothing on the floor
15:43:36 So they told us to pack whatever we can take. Of course, everybody packed whatever we thought was the most important things in our lives. I don't know what you packed. I packed my diary, my pictures, my notebook. Everything I thought I couldn't do without.
It had nothing to do with survival in a physical sense. I guess that I just wanted to survive in a psychological.
15:44:02 Engel: We could take anything because they knew that they would take it away.
Jacoby: So then we went to this brick factory and that's where the reality of the situation really hit me.
As I said earlier, I was thinking that it was even fun for me. I enjoyed the fact that we were together with so many people. I enjoyed the social aspects of it. My friends were all near. So it
was
15:45:25 very exciting for me. I couldn't feel the pain or the worry about things. Then in the brick factory, they told us that this is where __ staying. There was nothing. Nothing on the floor.
There was some straw and I remember that we wanted to lay on the straw. Then, I wanted to go to the bathroom and they told us that there were no bathrooms. I couldn't
15:46:00 understand how they could bring us to a place with no bathrooms. I remember that the men started to dig trenches to make latrines. It was an open latrine. It was just a little bit away from where the shelters were. They said,"That's where you go" And I wouldn't go. So I remember that for three days, I
15:46:35 didn't go to the bathroom. That was probably the beginning of the humiliation that I just couldn't get adjusted to. Then as soon as we settled down and set up a community kitchen, the transports suddenly started to strive from the outskirts of the city. Every day, we went up and watched who was coming. We were
15:47:04 separated [from them]. We were fenced in. One day, I saw my grandfather and grandmother. This grandfather that was held in awe by everybody, I suddenly saw being thrown out of the wagon. He was a beautiful man. Big white beard and very gentile looking.
There was nobody to help him. I
15:47:39 jumped over the fence and I put him on my shoulders and
carried him down.
Interviewer: He had a stroke many years before?
Jacoby: Yes. He wasn't quite conscious. I couldn't understand how they could do that to him. I carried him down and I laid him down on the straw. He started asking me where he was. I started
15:48:02 giving him this story that we are going to Palestine. That we are on the boat and the Messiah(?) had come. I remember deciding that I had to take care of him. There was no accommodation for sick or old people. Finally, we took him to one of the shelters where a hospital was set up. There were all these dying people there. All these helpless, dying people.
15:48:40 I organized my friends and we decided to take care of them. I remember how I had to overcome my repulsion to clean up the soil of these old people. And to feed them. I remember feeling that if anything, this is the best thing I can do in my life.
15:49:15 It didn't last very long. We were there about ten days.
Everybody was brought there.
My whole family who was alive or was still around, they all arrived there. So we all got together. Mostly kids and aunts. All of the uncles were taken away.
15:49:32 Some of my impressions of that place were that the Hungarian soldiers were different looking than the regular policemen. They wore a fester in their hats. They were called gender(?) . They had bayonets. That was a change. We still didn't have any Germans around.
15:50:05 I remember somebody got a postcard from Auschwitz to the brick factory. It said,"We arrived. We are fine. Loved somebody from our town. So we started to weave these dreams again.
15:50:27 Always weaving dreams about how good its going to be once we are taken away from this awful place. Were going to go somewhere. They're going to care for the old people. Were going to be working. We're going to have food. All this confusion is going
to end
15:50:44 and were going to be okay. We kept saying that to ourselves. So, one day they told us to pack everything we
15:51:55 can carry on our backs. We went up again on this little hill and were put into wagons.
Engel: Every day, they took transports from the different shelters.
Everyday, we ran from our shelter to another one because we heard that the Americans already were in France. It was June 6th. Every
day
15:52:41 counted. Monday the deportation started so Monday you went to one shelter and Tuesday you went to another shelter. So finally they took us up. There were about 20,000 Jews and two Germans. They had whips and were yelling,"Run, run, fast, fast." They put us in the cars. There were 80 inside.
Interviewer: Any men left?
Jacoby: There were some. Some of the older men were there. Those that were not taken to forced labor camps. The kids under 15 were there too. So we were all pressed into this wagon. That's
15:53:50 when I discovered my neighbor who I didn't know was Jewish
sitting there.
Engel: My father got sick in the ghetto. There was a wagon and they put all the sick people there. I didn't want my father to be alone.
He couldn't eat. He couldn't drink. So I went and got Lila(?) and they took her as a nurse for the sick people. So my
15:55:40 mother and father weren't there. Father was alive when we arrived. My mother got out of the wagon. I ran to where they were.
She was standing there in a nice dress and I said, "Come down and well go together. But she was smarter
15:56:23 than I was. She said, "No, I see that they are people. You know that what happens to me and your father will happen. Go and take care of your daughter and sister and leave me here. So I ran back to them. We were standing there five in a line. I had a cousin there with two little children. I had the little girl in my hands,
15:57:21 There was Mengele. He was standing there and he was counting people. He said,"Women give the children to the older and go on this side to work." So I felt that I was young. I was 40
years old.
15:57:52 So I took this baby and I gave it to the mother. She cried,"Don't leave me alone. I can't take care of two children." But I gave it to her. There came Mengele. He said,"Where do you want to go?" I told him on this side. "Are you strong? Can you work?" I can work more than all
15:58:27 these young people who you sent there. So I went there and the other four went on the other side.
Jacoby: When we arrived at Auschwitz, one of the things that I remember that I was hoping for was some order because of the very
great confusion that
15:58:50 was before this in the ghetto and in the brick factory.
There was order when we got out. Because I saw people lined up there and I felt some relief. I heard the music and saw the beautiful flowers. I was hoping that something would happen. I saw in the far background so many people
15:59:21 wearing prison garb. They were waving to us and signaling to us. I figured that they must be the mentally ill. I didn't understand what they were trying to tell us. The message was of course to try to get on that side and not on the other side.
Interviewer: Introduce yourselves.
Engel:My name is Malvina(?) Engel(?) .
Jacoby: My name is Erika Jacoby. I was born in Miskolz(?) Hungary
in 1928.
16:01:32 Engel: I was born in 1901.
Jacoby: I wanted to come back a little to what we said earlier when my mother said that there were only two soldiers when we were put in the transports. What that really meant is there were only two German soldiers, but the Hungarians cooperated and collaborated so much. They were the ones who actually carried out the orders. So that didn't mean that they were only guarded by only two soldiers
16:02:11 Which obviously would have made it very easy for some of
us to escape.
Interviewer: What happened then when the transport got you to Auschwitz and you were divided up?
16:02:29 Jacoby: When we were divided up, my mother finally found me and my aunt. We were in the same barracks. We were shaven and given one piece of clothing. No underwear, no shoes. I remember laughing. We looked at each other and laughed because we
16:02:55 looked so horrible. We didn't recognize each other. The whole process of getting undressed in front of the Germans and being exposed there brought back this feeling of senselessness. I wanted order. I guess what I wanted was to make some sense out of this. It was so foreign. We were brought up in a very modest,
religious
16:00:00 Jewish home where not only did we not get undressed in front of other people, but we didn't uncover parts of our bodies ever. To follow the order to get undressed, we looked at each other
and we
16:04:20 didn't believe that we really had to do that. That this wasn't an order we could say no to. So when we arrived at the barracks, I was looking for friends to see if some of my classmates were there. One of my classmates who was my very best friend happened to be with me. We were given food to eat in this pot. They told us that ten of us will drink from this pot. I
16:05:11 wanted to drink, but I just couldn't and my friend said that she wasn't even going to try. I remember that I begged her,"Please do because you're not going to live" And she said,"No.
I just can't. I can't drink that." The third day, I finally began to drink the soup. So I could overcome my repulsion with that, but she couldn't. And she didn't live. She died a few weeks later of starvation. She couldn't even drink
16:05:50 that soup. The confusion and the senselessness were the most overwhelming feelings I had. ____ We saw all these fences, watchtowers and Germans, but we didn't understand. I was sure that my grandparents were taken to a hospital and that we were going to see them on Sunday. I was very sure
16:06:37 of that. I don't think that I paid any notice to the chimneys. After ten days, they told us that if they could take us to a place to work then we would be safe. So we knew that we had to get away from there. So after ten days when they asked for a
transport, we
16:07:13 wanted to go. They were taking transports one after the other to working camps. So we were taken to Krskow which is not really the city, but the outskirts which are called Prashov(?) . It
wasn't too
16:07:36 far from Auschwitz, but we traveled for a day and a half.
It was a completely different scene. The work was mining rocks out of the mountain. It was terribly hard. It was so exhausting and impossibly difficult that many of us just couldn't do it. Many
16:08:06 of us perished there. We met older inmates there who had hair. That was very encouraging for me. We asked them why they still had hair. Then they started telling us these horrible stories. This young man told us that he had
16:08:52 to kill his whole family before we arrived there to make room for us. They had to exterminate all the children and older people to make room for the workers. One day, we were able to get to the trash and find some horse bones that they threw out from the kitchen. This was the middle of summer and very hot so the horse bones were covered with flies. I remember that we got to these bones and we started
16:09:36 chewing them. We were feeling like we found paradise. We also had a lot of bedbugs which contributed to our suffering. They got on these sores that we had developed from lack of nutrition and
started eating.
16:09:56 point that we actually had little bedbugs nestled inside our cheeks. There were some things that were better such as we had beds and some things were of course already worse. We heard the Russians coming closer and closer. This was 1944 in the summer. We
heard already
16:10:43 about the Normandy invasion. We were hoping that with the Russians advancing, we would be liberated. It didn't happen. As soon as the Russians got close enough, the Germans loaded us into the cattle cars and transported us back to Auschwitz. There was a big difference because this time, we already knew what Auschwitz was. We wizened up. We knew what happens when you get there and you're selected out. We knew what the chimneys were. I was very worried about my mother. During the summer, she was the one who was
still stronger.
16:00:20 We used to carry big rocks and hand them over to each other. She used to want to skip me and give over the bag to the next one. Of course, she suffered a permanent back injury from that. Toward the end of our stay in Prashov(?) , she
16:00:50 developed a fever everyday. Her legs ware covered with sores which we wrapped with paper so that the flies wouldn't eat at it. When we arrived at Auschwitz, suddenly I saw all my cousins who looked in pretty bad shape being sent to the wrong side. I saw my mother standing there looking pretty hellacious. We decided that we
16:12:20 were going to stay together. So we sent my aunt first because she was the strongest and we knew that she would pass. Then we decided to send my mother second.
As I saw her pass in front of Dr. Mengele, I suddenly yanked the wrapping off her legs because I saw that anybody wearing wrapping
was
16:12:51 sent to the other side. I gave her a clap on her back. She straightened up and passed without any hitch. Then we were taken to the baths. Of course, every time we were taken to the baths, we were never sure whether that was really the baths or the gas
chamber
16:13:20 We were shaven again. That was a real loss because already we had a little bit of hair. It seems ridiculous that that was important, but it was. This time we also got numbers tattooed on our arm. We were taken to Birkenau. On our way to the barracks, I found two treasures. I found a little spreading knife and little
silver necklace. Somebody
16:16:38 must have lost it. I was delighted. I put on the necklace and I felt like nobody could do anything to me. We arrived at the barracks. We had beds here. Ten of us were on one of these platforms so that every time somebody had to turn, everybody had to turn. We had no blankets.
16:17:10 My mother was quite ill. I used to cover her with my body every night because she was shivering so. They thought that she had malaria. I wouldn't let her go to the infirmary because I knew that if she went there, she would never come back. One day we stood in line for food. This blockhauphster(?) who was a very beautiful Jewish young woman saw me standing in line with this necklace. She tore it off my neck. Of course, I
16:17:59 started to cry. My mother became furious. What did you do?
Engel: I told her,"How can you be so cruel? You have children too.
She said,"What shall I do for you?" Give her a half a spoonful more
soup every day." Jacoby: So from then on, I got a half a spoonful more food which probably helped me survive. They took us to the bath once a week because the Germans were very meticulously clean. They were
16:20:12 afraid that we would get ill and then they would get ill.
They disinfected us once a week. As we were walking to the baths one day, we saw my uncle next to the road working with the __. My uncle who has taken away the first
16:20:46 day the Germans arrived in Hungary. He saw us and he started to scream. We couldn't get to him of course. On our way back, he managed to get through the fence. He gave us bread and a sweater for me. He gave us a kiss and a hug. We never saw him again. He was killed I think when they blew up one of the crematorium. We were taken to another working camp after six weeks. This was probably the best conditions that we had in the camps. During this time, my mother
16:22:13 was the sickest. She was so sick that sometimes I had to hide her in the trash in the mornings because she couldn't go out to work. I would dig her at night. From that camp, we went to another camp. We were taken away in the middle of December. In this
16:23:17 camp, we dug trenches and also pipes. Then we were taken to an ammunition factory. At first, we were housed about six m__ away and every morning we had to walk at work in the snow to work.
My mother became a forbef(~) there. That meant that she was a very good worker. She was
16:23:50 supervising 24 of us. I was several times able to survive by sheer luck. One of the things I did was I made little charms from leftover metal. I sold them for bread. I even sold some to the German soldiers who sent it home to their children.
16:24:42 I don't know if by then we had any different understanding of what was happening, but I think we still believed that although everybody else's family was destroyed, not ours. We had a whole system for survival. For example, one of the things that helped me
was that
16:25:12 every night, I took off that one piece of clothes and I folded it just the way I would at home. I tried to simulate some kind of balance in my life. The other thing I remember is that we took off a little piece of our bread and we put it away for shabath? So you saved that for Shabat? We always had too pieces of bread. Standing in line, we would sometimes pray
16:25:46 loudly. Whoever knew the prayers would lead us. We were liberated on May 8,1945 by the Russian army. We stayed about a month in the ares. My mother went to work for the Germans to get some food for us. She went back to work for them.
16:26:13 After about a month, we were able to get a wagon with a horse. We hid inside the wagon that took us to the railroad station. We started our journey back to Hungary because we wanted to see who was alive from our family.
Interviewer: Who was left?
Jacoby: Every day, everybody who was alive went to the railroad station waiting for others to see who was
16:27:04 coming. So I arrived there and my brother was there.We lived for about two years in Hungary ____ two years in Cuba. I couldn't get into the United
16:27:28 States and other way so I came in illegally. I was flown in by a private pilot. That's how I finally got to the United States where I finally married Emily to whom I was engaged to before we left Hungary.
My mother and brother ware able to get from Cuba to Mexico where my uncles were. Eventually, my mother came over to the U.S.
Engel: That's the nice part of the story.
16:28:37 Interviewer: Thank you for telling us.
. END.
