Interview with Harry Gelb
December 13, 2001 Beginning Tape One, Side A
Question: Okay. United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, Jeff and Toby Herr collection. This is an interview with Harry Gelb, conducted by Regina Baier on December 13th, 2001, in Mr. Gelb’s home in New York City. Mr. Gelb is the son of Holocaust survivor Regina Gelb -- Regina Gelb, who has been interviewed for the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum’s oral history collection. This interview is part of the USHMM’s post Holocaust interview project. The U.S. Holocaust Memorial Museum gratefully acknowledges Jeff and Toby Herr for making this interview possible. This is tape number one, side A. My first two questions are sort of questions that we’ll ask everybody. They are kind of formal, but easy. Give us your full name and your date and place of birth.
Answer: My name is Harry Gelb, G-e-l-b. I was born on May sixth, 1956, and I was born here in Manhattan, in Washington Heights on -- it’s upper Broadway, near Dighton Street.
Q: Were you named after anybody in particular?
A: Yes, I was named after my paternal grandfather, who died about two years before I was born.
Q: Was he -- did he die during the -- during the Holocaust, or was it in America?
A: No, no, this -- my -- my father is born in America, and his father was also born here, a newly, newly new -- I believe his parents are newly arrived on the Lower East Side, perhaps at the e-end of the last century.
Q: Okay, let’s talk about your parents a little bit. When you think back -- we’re doing this chronologically, I think, which is easier in some ways. We can always jump back and forth later.
A: True.
Q: When you think back as a small boy, how do you remember your parents? Difference in -- difference in personalities, wh-what kind of -- when you think back, describe them to us, when we haven’t seen them.
A: Mm-hm, well actually they’re both alive, so when I say -- you ask, how do I remember my parents, i-it’s -- it’s an unusual question. I -- I remember them, seeing them, talking to them virtually every day now. If you’re asking about the differences between them, and -- and to compare and contrast them, they’re -- they’re quite different people. I think the most salient difference that one would notice even at first blush is that my mother is clearly European born, you can tell that just by her accent, and my father is an American Jew. A-A -- their personality types are also quite different. My father is a r-reasonably calm and excessively well organized person. My mother, although she is -- is quite well organized, is a very intellectually driven person with a -- a constant thirst for a-acquiring new knowledge and reconsidering and re-evaluating things in her life, both the significant and the trivial on a day to day basis, but her mind is constantly focused on that sort on of endeavor.
Q: I guess my -- my question was sort of trying to first of all get you back into childhood, but also trying to bring out whether or not your perception of your parents has changed over the years [indecipherable]
A: Oh, I can answer, I do -- I do not think that my perception of them has changed over the years. I think that w -- the one thing one can say about each of my parents, even my father, who is American, and brings with that certain cultural baggage, is that they don’t -- th-they don’t move with -- with the changes and ebbs and flows of American society. They’ve been very consistent in their own personality types throughout my life. And the things that they were concerned with or dedicated to at the time of my birth, a-and mine and my brother’s upbringing continue to this day. They -- they behave and -- and dress actually, very much in the ways that I recall them having done so when I was a child.
Q: Interesting. Talk about your brother a little bit. Who is -- what’s his name, when --
A: My br --
Q: -- when he was born, and -- and what -- what type is he?
A: Mm-hm. My brother’s name is Paul Gelb. Right now he lives in Albuquerque, but obviously he lived here in New York with our family when he grew up. He was born April 13th of 1960, also here in Manhattan, which makes him four years younger than me. And I remember very well the time when he was born, and having been sent for a -- a sleepover to a friend’s, while my mother gave birth to Paul. I remember him coming home from the hospital and having a -- a reasonably good memory myself, I recall details of our upbringing very, very well since the day he came home, because that was his fourth birthday and my memory goes back even farther than that. And is there anything in particular you’d like to know about him? The way he looks, what his interests are? Q: Describe him -- just describe him a little bit to us. Sort of as -- over -- against how you think you are, how you see yourself, maybe.
A: Physically my brother, i-it’s obvious to anyone who would see us, is -- is -- he’s a very -- looks very different. I am about six feet tall, weigh about 155 pounds, I’m a very thin -- thin framed person. And my brother is about six feet five inches tall, is physically built -- the only way I can describe him, as I’ve often said, is that he looks like, literally like the statue of a Greek god. He works with his body, meaning he’s a landscaper and he designs things and works with things outdoors, heavy things, all day. And I’m sure in large part because of this, he’s able to keep up the tremendous physique that he has. But he’s always been a very physical person. I’ve been a very much more intellectually oriented, and my brother has always been oriented towards sports, the great outdoors, and using his body and keeping it moving and doing things at all times. Very different type of person from me. We had very similar education though, we went to the same grade school, the same junior high school and the same high school. And we went to similar colleges. We went from PS 187 to junior high school 143, both in upper Manhattan. Then each of us went to the Bronx High School of Science. And then I went on to Hamilton College, and four years later, Paul went on to Saint Lawrence University. Both of those are smaller, upstate New York institutions.
Q: Did you get along when you were small? Were you kind of friends, did you sh -- did you share things, or was it difficult because you were so -- such different people?
A: I think actually we got along very well. There’s always sibling rivalry, and any pair of brothers who are four years apart who say that they don’t have periodic, or sometimes unrelenting battles between the two of them would be prevaricating. I’ll -- I’ll just say that we -- we got along just fine. He, because of his great physical abilities was often welcomed in with my circle of friends, almost as a co-equal, so that he could so-called hang with them, and play sports with them, and they looked at him very much as one of their own friends. I’m sure that he -- that being welcomed by -- by my friends made his life a little more easy, or fun.
Q: It’s a -- it’s a good chance, actually, to go back into your childhood, because you said your memory goes back so far. I’m -- my own does, too, which is interesting, it does in -- sort of in glimpses. Put -- give us those glimpses that you remem -- give us a few, sort of impressions from what you remember, what it was like in your house, what -- what do you remember?
A: Hm. Well, I rem -- first of all, looking at our general family constellation, some of the most interesting and fun things that -- that we did, meaning Paul and I did as children, was to go and visit our relatives. My mother’s family, each -- she has two older sisters, one sister lived with her family in Vineland, New Jersey, the other sister lived with her family in Toronto, Canada. And travels out of New York City, to different venues are always interesting to any child. What was very unique -- visiting Toronto, of course, is a foreign country, but I don’t think there is anything in Toronto that particularly grabbed our attention when compared to our lives in New York, except that it was always fun to see our cousins and that sort of thing. Going to Vineland was very interesting because at that time, our aunt and her husband, our uncle lived on and owned a chicken egg farm. And they had dogs and rabbits and people who worked there. And imagine coming from Washington Heights and then all of a sudden being allowed to play in -- in a wide open farm with your cousins who took you around and showed you all of these things that you’d never been exposed to before. You had the run of the land, you had the run of the animals, you had the run of the house. It was really a big adventure. We also had a paternal grandmother, who lived in Asbury Park, New Jersey, very, very close to the beach. So when we visited there it was always pleasant for my mother to take us over to the shore. It was only about four or five blocks directly to the beach, and we could go on the little rides, and -- and get a salt water taffy, and orange-ade, and waffles with ice cream and hang out on the shore, and if the weather is right we could even go in the water. But we could go to the beach any time of the year, as long as it was clement weather. That was always a fun thing to do. My brother and I had free run of the neighborhood i-in Washington Heights, that’s near 190th Street and Fort Washington Avenue. In those days -- and these days as well, but in those days it was a very, very safe, and the children could wander the neighborhood freely, enjoying everything from the Cloisters Museum in Fort Tryon Park, all the way through playing ball in the schoolyard as most children would do. So we had quite a range of things to keep us busy in that neighborhood. Fort Tryon Park in particular providing a spot where a lot of different sorts of recreations and adventures could be had.
Q: Do you recall -- before I -- we talk a little bit more about what it was like at home, in your home atmosphere and so on, do you remember the particular circumstance or event or so when you first realized, understood, that your mother was what we now call a Holocaust s -- a Holocaust survivor?
A: There was never a time that I can recall that I was not aware that she and her sisters were Holocaust survivors. As a matter of fact my mother has always made it a point, and I know this not only because she did it, but because she said to me, and has reminded me that she has done so, to be very honest a-a-about her background, and I’m quite certain knowing her, that she told us things in an age appropriate manner, meaning age appropriate as far as we children were concerned. But we have known as -- as long as I can remember, what our roots were.
Q: Do you remember partic -- a particular sort of w -- how she talked to you about it, or do you -- its -- an-and your response, your feelings? How do you -- how did you f -- how did you feel?
A: Well --
Q: What -- what was your response to it? Sort of, curiosity, fear, anger, resentment, what sort of happened?
