United States Holocaust Memorial Museum Interview with Michael Bernath March 22, 1990
RG-50.030*0022
PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a videotaped interview with Michael Bernath, conducted by Linda Kuzmack on March 22, 1990 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview took place in Washington, DC and is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview cannot be used for sale in the Museum Shop. The interview cannot be used by a third party for creation of a work for commercial sale.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
MICHAEL BERNATH
March 22, 1990
[Technical conversation] 01:01:17
Q: Would you tell me your full name please?
A: My name, my name is Michael, Miklós, Bernath. Q: Where and when were you born?
A: I was born in Szikszó, Abaúj-Torna Vármegye,in Hungary. Q: What year?
A: I was born in February the 14, 1923.
Q: Tell me about your parents and about your family.
A: Well, my parents, my parents – when my mother – my father was 50 years old when I was born and my mother was 46 and we were 12 children all together. We were three girls and, and, and nine boys. I was the youngest between them. And as a child I remember when I was about six or seven years old, I didn't even know I'm Jewish that – till I – the first time I went to – we had a soccer stadium in our village. The shtetl, we used to call them. And as I was, as I was going to the football game as a little boy, I brushed against a, a goyim, as a, as a gentile man, you know. So he call, he called me a "Jew bastard." So then I went home and said to my mother and father, said, "They called me a 'Jew bastard.'" You know, Hungarian. So she said to me, said "The next time don't brush against the same guy – same man." Well, the Christians have always been antisemitic in, in Hungary and they, they got it probably from their mother's milk. They were, they were taught in a Sunday School, I suppose by the clergy, to hate us or whatever. To always – used to call us I remember as kids, you know, "dirty Jews" and "Jew bastards," you know, as I was growing up. But somehow I never, I never called them anything, any names or we never taught in school you know to, anything about to hate Christians. But nevertheless the – I suppose the clergy for centuries and generations there, they were teaching their children in Sunday School to be antisemitic and not just Hungary, it was all over you know. So sometimes, you know, they used to call the old childhood words like, “sticks and stones doesn't,” what you call it, “sticks and stones might hurt my bone but words never hurt me.” You know, you ever heard that? So that was our philosophy you know. They can call us anything. It's what a different–
1 County (Hungarian)
01:04:53
Q: Tell me about your, your, your childhood with your brothers and sisters. Did you play a lot? Did you go to school?
A: Well, with children, I was the youngest and I have a brother, he was 27 year older than I, and he was – I remember when he got married, I was three or four years old and I had a brother, his name was Joe, Joseph. He came to America when I was, before I was born back in 1922, and I was born in 1923. And he used to send some – sometimes he had little extra money, used to send money to home, to Hungary you know. And my, my father used to, he used to be a bootmaker and shoe, shoebuilder – shoe, shoe – you know, he used to…. But he didn't make too much money, you know, and with a lot of kids you know. But nevertheless I had a brother Hugo, he was – he went to Catholic Gymnasium. He wanted to be a medical doctor, and only way he could go to Gymnasium, he went to a Protestant Gymnasium. Gymnasium is, you know, is like high school you know here. So, but Jews – they were very hard to get into those schools you know, the, the parochial schools, Catholic schools for instance, but because my – our name Bernath, it wasn't solid Jewish and we came through the name problem. But there was the money problem also, you know. So we came through the somehow the money problem and he graduated from Gymnasium in – he was 18 years old in Miskolc and he, he applied to medical school in Prague, Czechoslovakia, because in Hungary the Jews couldn't get into med. school. It was just – it was impossible. So he applied to Prague, Czechoslovakia. He was accepted and but later on he – after a year, he transferred himself to Bologna medical school and first he had to learn the Czech language, then he had to learn the Italian language fluently because he had to go to med. school you know. And beside in, in the gymnasium they had to learn three more languages, German, Latin and English. He, my brother, was very – he knew, he knew six, seven, eight languages, my brother. But he finished his medical studies in Bologna and became a medical doctor in Bologna. Well actually, Bologna is the first medical – it was the first medical school in the world. So, he came home and came home. He worked in the – then they accepted him. The Christians accepted him in Hungary. Well when was finished as a doctor, then he could work in the hospital you know. So he was working next to a surgeon and finally took him to Russia, to a slave – you know, slave labor camp, and disappeared and in 1943, in Voronezh, by the Don River. I don't know if you've ever heard it – it was a big push that time and he just disappeared and we never heard of him again.
01:08:37 Then I had another brother, Andy. He was – he came to the United States in 1939, just in nick of the time. Just, with my uncle, escaped certain death you know from the. … Then we left home just one, one brother, Sandor, and, and my two sisters, mother and father 2 High school (German) and all my, my aunt my aunts and cousins and most of them, most of them, they were killed – mother and fathers, brothers, sisters, children. And one sister, Magda and I, who survived the, survived the Holocaust. So just I remembered when I, in 1943, like I told you, the antisemitism became so rampant in – and there were Jew-haters before, but in 1943 start getting so harsh on us. And we heard the cries like from Czechoslovakia, from Poland – “they're killing us,” you know. We didn't – who – we didn't want to believe it, you know, such a, stories you know. We wanted – thought here just rumors, you know.
01:10:13
Q: Where you had been up to this point?
A: I was – well, I was a furrier. I was working there because I learned to be a furrier in Miskolc. And then I went to work as a full-fledged fur-furrier in Budapest and, and, and Miskolc. Then of end of 1943 it was it was just, just unbearable and beginning of 1944 Jews couldn't – we couldn't travel. It was constant harassment, you know, for identification. And when the German came in March 1944 into Hungary, I was then 21 years old already and, and I…. So, it was just awful. And you know start getting the Jews again disappearing, getting the Jews. And the Christian population – grown up together you know in the town – we used to know each other – whole families you know, became so anti-Jewish you know. Our neighbors and Jewish men used to walk on the street, used to – with, with the beard, used to grab – the Christian boys used to grab him and used to cut his, his beard through his neck. We had to see that, you know, many times. And they came to our houses and take inventory you know of the – we were 1,200 Jews. We lived in this little town with them 5,000 people. Between 5,000 were 1,200 Jews – women, men, children. And they took everybody's name and livestock, whatever have, you know, took inventory in the house, and used to rob, rob everything. Their food supplies, they tell us, “You know, you don't need – Jews, you don't need – you Jew bastards, you don't need this anymore.” So, my poor mother, you know she was she used to in desperation in desperation you know, to call the Lord to help us, you know – “Shema Israel.” She was determined. Seventy-one years old – my father was 71, and family looked up to my father and in his desperation looked up for, for help, you know, to Him. But he couldn't do anything. He in desperation called the Lord, “Shema Israel.”
01:13:52 Then they gathered, the first day they gathered the about three, 400 of us. I was one of them, one of the first transport because I had the, the induction papers going to the slave labor camp. So they gathered us three or four hundred and took us to the middle of this town. It was it was in a government building, the yar– their yard. The gendarmes, you know, the gendarmes, the gendarmes, with the bayonet fixed on the – they took helpless children and their mother's arms and old ladies and the women, the Rabbi and they told 3 Hear, O Israel (Hebrew); declaration of God’s unity and watchword of Jewish faith.
everybody to undress. "What's the matter with you, Jew bastard, mother fuckers. Where you hiding your, your jewelry, necklaces? We going to find them.” And said, said, “Just spread your, spread your legs and, and bend over and keep your mouth open, you going to find. You bastard Jews." You know. So old religious women you know, that they never learned these words, you know, these nasty words and it never, didn't know how to act in front of strangers, you know, and they had to search them. And if anybody complained, the rifle butts came down on him, on that person, whatever – children whatever and the, and the little boys, they would try to shield their mothers. The cursing and hitting constantly, "You Jew bastards," you know the. … And they had to do a certain terrible searches you know, of little girls and little babies. The people on stretchers, they turned them over you know – they're, they're looking, looking for valuables, you know.
And the Chris-Christians outside the – you can look inside from outside you know, you could look inside the courtyard – the cheering, cheering on, you know, from the outside.
01:16:42 So and the next morning they herd us, everybody to rails. Everybody with stretcher to go to the railroad station and about six o'clock in the morning and there they had four boxcars there. They can – and everyone of them for about 400 Jews, you know, it gathered the first day. They took, they took us to Kassa, Kassa – that's a ghetto in, in Kassa. Kassa's Košice – same thing. It's about 70, 80 kilometers from my town. And they came with the – they herd – they were herding the Jews and some of them couldn't walk and finally I went – at the railroad station I went to the Rabbi I remember and he blessed me, you know. So, he told – said the old biblical blessing you know the "Yivarekhekha Adonai v'yishmerekha. Ya’eir Adonai panav eilekha vikhuneka. Yisa Adonai panav eilekha, v'yaseim lekha shalom. "And I looked in his eyes. I could have seen the glory of the coming of the Lord. And put everybody in – when the train arrived they put everybody in-into the wagon, in the boxcars and they threw in a bucket or bucket you know for waste and wasn't enough for a one hour, you know, for someone to put 80 or 100 person one boxcars. They couldn't – just standing up, couldn't sit down. Cursing and the – “You Jew bastards,” you know. Some of them begging for water you know – not, not me, but a little girl, little baby. “You Jew bastards. Mother fuckers,” you know cursing. Nothing but help from the Christians, you know, some passengers helping, helping, they helped to step how high the boxcars from the throwing in the, helping, pushing and shoving into, the Jews into the boxcars. It took them maybe 10 hours to get in, to get into Kassa ghetto. There they were already, they have assigned places they could, they could have go. They were – but I had to go into the slave labor camp myself.
01:20:00 Had to report. There were thousands and thousands of men up to thir–30, maybe 35, you 4 (May) the Lord bless and guard you/ (May) the Lord shine His face upon you and be gracious to you/ (May) the Lord lift His face to you and grant you peace. (Hebrew); priestly blessing.
know, in this labor camp. And they took my name. “What's your father's name? And what's the whore, whore name? What's my mother?” – they were call my mother, “the whore, the whore name,” you know, the, the – if anybody tried to complain that she's not a whore, then he didn't have too many teeth left in his mouth. They were there brutality, the – it was, was worse than the Hungarians. They were they were antisemitic and we know that. The Hungarian gendarmes were antisemitic , but they wanted to tease the – to show the Germans they were they could do, they could do better than they. And, and they were just bru– they were – the brutality was, I tell you, unspeakable. So in the Kassa, in the – when I was in the slave labor camp, they didn't do much and but I heard that they got – they – I find out where's they’re – from the ghetto actually they took the Jews into a brick factory – about 30,000 of them from Kassa, from the area of Kassa, Košice. It was a brick factory and I want to see my family. They're all there. And my girlfriend, she was only 16, 16½ and I was 21. Just want to see them again. But to get inside you know, in the – into the brick factory was just as, it was it was terrible you know. They would, could shot you on sight, you know the…. So, what I did with the risk of my life, I took off my yellow star and arm band, yellow arm band. And I approached the gate. So said to me, "You, what are you doing outside, you Jew bastard. What you doing out?" I said – I remember I said, “I went out with the” – I lied to them that I went out with the funeral detail from the camp and they coming after me. So they finally believed, believed in me you know, otherwise they would shoot me right there to the German, German shepherd. They were surrounded you know, this ghetto.
01:22:50 Finally, I went in. I found my mother and my father. And my mother was so worried that somebody going to, you know, find me and they shoot me right, right away. It was no buts, you know. This was slightest punishment for the Jew – they shoot him. But they wanted to take him, you know. They really didn't want to shoot them – they, you know – right there. They want to take everybody out away you know from the extermination camp. So it was a big problem how to get out from the brick factory. So finally with another lie I said – with another funeral detail, I got out, you know, from the area, and I went back to my, my unit, you know, to the slave labor camp. And May, it was May 15th when I heard that they're going to ship them out. They're going to take them to further.
We didn't know exactly where they're going to take them but we know already they take them to, out of the country, you know. The ghetto – they going to liquidate the ghetto.
Not the ghetto, the factory but actually it was a ghetto and factory. So I tried to get in. I tried to go out and get in. I could get out from the forced labor camp easier but to get into the ghetto it was impossible already. The trains, they just pull-pulled into, into the – directly into the boxcars in into the brick factory, and 10,000 they can fit in hundred boxcars. They put them in-into the into the boxcars without any food or water. And they ship them to Auschwitz, from there directly to Auschwitz. 10, 20 of them, 30 of them were dead; they were when they arrived. That's what I heard already from – my sister told me. She was with them. She, then she told me from there on, because I wasn't there. But she told me then what happened after and when they arrived to, half-dead, you know, in Auschwitz. And without food and water the little babies you know – they couldn't sit down. They were – they were pulling them out by their hair from, the from the wagons. "Raus,you verfluchte Juden." You know, they were speaking German there already. "Raus, you bastard Jews!” You know, and they're worse, they're, they're worse. Didn't know what's what, you know. They were, they were half dead. They were lined them up and she said and it was in distance – there were thousands of them. You know, 10s – 10,000. There was a nice gentleman there with the, the white glove and just pointing on which side they should go, you know, the left or the right. Children, with babies and my sister had a little – she was a two year old little girl. She was so cute. She right away to the left, they sent her mother and my father, my older brother – he was Sandor. He was at that time 47, 48, and my sister Mag-Magda she was, the only one sent to the right, you know, to, to work. And the rest of them, first they went, there was a preparation room and, and they used to cut their hair and they thought they're going into the show – into take a shower, you know. Then they realized that it was too late, you know. The, the doors closed and the rest is history.
