United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Ezra Sherman
May 16, 2014
RG-50.030*0750
PREFACE The following interview is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
EZRA SHERMANPRIVATE
May 16, 2014
Question: This is a United States Holocaust Memorial Museum interview with Mr. edg – Ezra Sherman, on May 16th, 2014, in Washington, D.C. Thank you very much, Mr. Sherman, for agreeing to speak with us today.
Answer: You’re welcome.
Q: We’re going to begin the interview at the very beginning. So, I’m going to ask a few questions about your childhood, about your family, about the town you were born in, or the village you were born in. So I’ll start now. Can you tell me please, your name at birth, your date of birth, and we’ll go from there.
A: My name is Ezra Sherman. Was born in 1931.
Q: What was the date?
A: February 25th, 1931.
Q: And was your name Sherman also, when you were born?
A: Yes.
Q: Okay. Where were you born, Mr. Sherman?
A: A li – a little town, was Poland that time. The name is Mlynov.
Q: Mlynov. And –
A: To-Today they call it Mylniv, it’s Ukraine today.
Q: Oh, so you were born in the –
A: Poland.
Q: In Poland, but in the eastern section.
A: In the w – in the west.
Q: In the west?
A: The west section, not the eastern.
Q: Oh, I – but how could it b-border the Ukraine?
A: Til ’39, was Poland.
Q: Okay.
A: In ’39, the Russian captured the west part of Ukraine, in what’s today called –
Q: Yes, west part –
A: – west part –
Q: – of Ukraine, that’s true.
A: Yes.
Q: Okay, okay. And Mlynov, was it a large town?
A: A little town with about 1200 Jews living, and a couple hundred Gentiles; Ukrainian, Poles, Czechs some. And around was still villages.
Q: So, it was small.
A: Small, very small town.
Q: And most – but mostly, from you say, it was mostly a Jewish town.
A: I would say yes. The majority was Jewish.
Q: What were your father and mother’s names?
A: My father’s name was Moshe.
Q: Moshe.
A: Yes. And my mother’s name was Esther.
Q: Esther. Do you remember her maiden name?
A: Yes. My mother’s name was Golysuk(ph).
Q: Golysuk(ph).
A: And my father Sherman.
Q: Yeah. And were they also from Mlynov?
A: Yes. They – in there, yeah, yeah.
Q: Okay. So did you have a larger family, aunts and uncles, and –
A: Yes, from both sides.
Q: Yeah?
A: I would say about 200 people.
Q: So your father’s side, do – did he have brothers and sisters?
A: I had one brother – two brothers and a sister.
Q: You?
A: There were four kids, yes.
Q: Okay.
A: I was the youngest one.
Q: What are – what were their names?
A: My brother after me was Josef(ph), and my sister, her name was a Jawa(ph).
Q: Jawa(ph)?
A: Yes. And my older brother, the oldest, was Jacheal(ph).
Q: Jachear(ph)?
A: Jacheal(ph).
Q: Jacheal(ph).
A: Yes.
Q: Mm-hm. And how much older was your oldest brother?
A: My oldest brother was eight years older than I am.
Q: So he was born in 1923?
A: He was in 1922.
Q: ’22.
A: Yes.
Q: In 1922. And how did your father support the family?
A: My father had a butcher shop, and he used to like be a middle man, selling cattle, buying cattle.
Q: Would he go out to the villagers and buy cattle from them, or they would bring it to him?
