United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Leopold Page
March 11, 1992
RG-50.042*0022 PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a videotaped interview with Leopold Page, conducted on March 11, 1992 in Beverly Hills, California on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
LEOPOLD PAGE
March 11, 1992
Beep.
I want you to describe for me Oscar Schindler. Describe what he was like, what he looked like, and then tell me in general what he did. I've never heard of him. I don't know who he is.
I met Oscar Schindler the first time when I was hiding from the Gestapo who looking after me when I escaped from the Prisoner of War transport, and I was thinking that he's a Gestapo officer looking for me, and I still have my pistol, so I put the pistol behind, beh, behind my back, and I was waiting till my mother opened the house. He entered the, her apt, my mother was very scared, she ask him what he wish, and he said, "Don't worry, I'm not here to arrest anybody, I am here to make business with you because I took apt, a Jewish apt, from, and I pay money for the apt. I received it free, but I pay money to this Jewish fellow, and he said that you were in, interior decorating, and he was decorating his apt. This moment I came forwards. I knew that he's not a Gestapo officer. He was about 6'2" and I was only 5'8", so I looked to this guy, handsome face, young looking and in his early 30s or late 30s. How to describe his age he looked very mature, he was about 35 years old or 34 years old at this time, and he looks me, and I felt right away a closeness between him and me, and we start talking, and we became a friend right away from the first day we met. And he asked me to do some certain things to him and then market in city to give him, get him some goods to his new apt, I tell you what, he paid for it, and we became a very, very close associate together. He was a German, he was a Catholic, and I was Polish Jew. We stick together till the day he die in 1974. He did extraordinary things. He'd bought himself a factory, and employed Jewish people, and from the first day he employed, this is end of 1939, till the day we were liberated, he called those people who he took from the camps, close to 1300 people, women, children, women and men, from all type of professions, even a prostitute was in our camp, and he said he will try to save us, and he save us. He did extra ordinary job. It's very hard to explain this in a few words. You have to really go day by day to explain the danger what he was exposed to it. The danger that when he will be exposed, we will be perished. He managed to escape by bribing the high officials, and they were afraid to expose him because in this case they will lose their life too, so one hand was washing the other hand, by using bribes, by organizing a fake factory, we never produced anything in the factory. Everything was uh, staged, like in a movie, but he went through from the December of 1939, till May 8, 1945, and he promised to stick with us till 5 minutes after 12, and he kept his promise.
Tell me the scale, how many people do you think he rescued.
He start with about 36 in the beginning. He asked me many times to come to his factory, but I was very independent, I didn't want to go to factory, I want to have open hands, and figure out how to get every time because I wasn't sure what I would do. I didn't want to be in a camp, I didn't want to be in a gh-ghetto, I don't want to be any place, I want to run. But, in between I got married, and this changed completely my life because in 1940 in July, I got married to my wife who survived with me thanks to Schindler, and while I was tied up, I was trying to run, uh run, run away before, during the wintertime over the borders, but, the minute I met her, I decide to stay and see what, what happen. And I follow her up from Krakow to ghetto, from ghetto to, to concentration camp, and then we were separated. The man went to Gross Rosen in Sudetenland, and the women went to Auschwitz. Schindler pulled out the women, 300 women from Auschwitz by the list, and 900 men by the list from Gross Rosen, and was a miracle what never happened before and never happened after. And, he fed us, he protect us, he paid the money to Gestapo, 600-half, Deutsche marks, German marks for each of the prisoner, even though there were children who was in the age of 5-6 years old, and old women in his, their 60s. Well, he promised to protect us and save us and he did. This is a miracle of 20th Century.
Tell me what you called yourselves.
He called himself, we, he call-- What you called yourselves. What you called yourselves.
How I call myself?
The Schindler Jews, tell me about that.
We, the Sh--the Sh--the people who were employed, we decide to, we establish ourselves as a Schindler Jews, Schindler Juden. Why? Because he became like a father to us. When the, when the women were sent to Auschwitz, and we sent to Gross Rosen, I was, we were sure that is the end of the line. But, when we saw him coming over there to Gross Rosen to pick us up, and the women saw him over there in Auschwitz, pick--picking them up, and when we came to the factory in B-----, the Sudetenland, and we saw him, some definite feeling came to, to us. We knew that we are safe with Schindler how long he is with us, and this was a tremendous wonderful feeling. His camp in Krakow, what he established, what was all, only for protection purposes, not too much for work, except when they were working on the utensil, what he could sell it on the black, black market and get money for it, you understand, and use the money to bribe the officials, you understand, nothing was produced for the uh war effort of Germany. Everything was bought by him on the black market. Everything he bought for with his own money. I don't know that any of the Schindler Jews give him any money, that he should use it to save this life of the Jews. No. He was using only the money what we could sell on the black market, and this was the only income he got. And this was a very big income, because according to the estimation, what was done by, uh, German Distribution ------------, he spent in the last 8 months of the war, from October, 44, till May 45, he spent 4 million marks, equivalent in these days to 2 million pre-war dollars. That was a tremendous fortune. When he would like to wash his hands and run away with this amount of money, he would go any place in the world, and hide himself till the war was over. No, he stick with us, he spent the money, he save us, and he became a pauper. After the war, he didn't have a penny to his soul. We help him.
Why do you think he did that?
This question, I gu--, everybody asking me the same question. He got involved with the Jews right away in the beginning, and he knew about what the German has, they have in sleeves for us, what Hitler want to do with us. He knew that the Jews will be killed. Because he has a, not so much on the count that he was relig--a religious, he was not religious, but his upbring, upbringing from home propagated him. He has a lot of Jewish friends in his family. He was warned??? and he lost them when Hitler came to Sudetenland. And he knew what will happen. He decided on his own, from the bottom of his heart, from the goodness of his heart, to do something. First of all, he start to employ them, and the work, and working condition in his camp was so wonderful that people who were in the Plazov Camp, or in or in any concentration camp, called his camp and his factory what we ca--there was the name Amaria, we called them a paradise. Because everybody was dreaming to go to Schindler camp because it was, compared to the other camp was a paradise. He provided food, the ------------, he didn't allowed anybody to interfere with his work. He protected those people. And this the reason we call ourselves Schindler Jew because he save us. He said, "I will be your father, and you are my children. You are my children." This what he always said, "I stick with you till the end of the war." And he really kept his promise, was a big promise given to us, but he delivered. I don't know, maybe this was the destiny, I don't know how to answer.
I'm trying to find a short question. Define a ghetto. Define ghetto. What is a ghetto?
In 1939 in September when the Germ--German enter, the uh Poland, and conquered the Poland in 3 weeks, they right away established certain part of the city to put the Jews over there. We knew that something will happen. We didn't know in 1939, in 1940, even in 1941 that will happen, even though I was trained as officer, and we knew what happened in Germany, but never think to our mind that the German will destroy 6 million people. Never. I never will believe it. When somebody will tell me in this time that this will happen, I say it's impossible. Germany was on the height of, of the, in Europe, the most cultured country. But they decide.
We have to reload. We have to put another roll in.
Oh, I'm sorry.
That's okay.
Because I want to point the point what--- Changing film, camera roll 2 is up; Sync take 2 is up.
Beep.
Okay, I want you to finish explaining about the ghetto.
So, the German decide first to put the people who recognize who is Jewish, not Jewish, and they put the armband with Jewish star on it, so, and there was a law, when somebody was caught without the armband, was shot, sometime on the spot, sometime they took him to the hills. Then after a few months, they decide to bring all the people from the city of Krakow and surrounding area to a certain enclosed part of the city, and they pick a part of Padush, this is a suburb of Krakow, and they expel all the Polish population, the Catholic population, out from the, the, the uh, from this district, and they put all the Jews. Now, in this time, in, in Krakow was close to about 50 to 60,000 population. They only established that only 15,000 can go together, and only people who has a working passport with some German establishment, or private or government, and everybody was trying to get this type of perm-permit, who didn't get it couldn't get in, but, when they move in March, 1941 from the city to the ghetto, they said to everybody over there, in particular to the official Jewish community official, that they will be self-supporting, they will be self-managed, nothing will uh happen to them, they will be protected by the German government against the Polish population, and this the reason they putting us up in it. In this time, the control of the ghetto, they call this ghetto ---------, what, because the Jews were only Jews in, there's nobody else could be there. Will be controlled by police, regular police, but couple months, three months later, they change it, and Gestapo took jurisdiction and this was changed of completely different picture. They crossed the walls, they built the walls, they closed the ghetto, and nobody could get out or get in without special permission. The groups were going from the ghetto to work. People has to, have a certain permit to have, to stay in the ghetto has to have a working permit with some government, uh government uh establishment or private German establishment. Who didn't have it has to be removed or leave the ghetto.
Why did people not realize what was going to happen?
You see, the German use a very uh psychologic--psychological point of approach. They said, "You listen, you obey, nothing will happen to you, we are thinking about your welfare, this reason we're taking you out from all these apartments and houses and places where you live around the city to one place, we will provide you with the food, you will get the uh certain amount of food, the whole amount of food was not more than 400 to 600 calories a day. But it, even this was, was stops after a few, few months being there. And, you will not -----------survive the war, you will be protected and this, they were us--they were using a tac-tactic to keep the people quiet. When the people will realize that in 1941 what will happen in 1942, 43, 44, probably lots of the people will run away, the young. The old didn't have a chance. They didn't know where to go. But the young will have the chance. But, family, you know, Jewish family like to stick together. Uh, the sentiment and the love affection of children to parents, parents to children, husband to wife, wife to husband, they all tried to. What happened to me will happen to the, to my family, and they were sticking together, and they obey the orders, because not obeying the order was automatically uh bullet in the head. And they were using the strong tactics to force the people to obey the rules.
Was there any resistance in the ghetto, and did you play a role in that resistance?
There was quite a bit of resistance in the ghetto. I did not pl-play the role there, were only a couple of my students who participate, Shemegrenger, and Lieberskin, and couple of other ones. They organized underground, they were more prepared by the organization to which they belong. The uh, the Jewish organization, and they organized. They realize, they already lost pro-probably all the family, they were all abou--on their own, and they organize, and they devastated the German in the first uh mo--few months of their existence. They were caught later on and they were all executed. They were all killed.
You had an experience one time in the ghetto where you heard Arnold Gette, and others were outside and you were, can you-- Can you add something to the resistance? You see this was a resistance, but was different type of resistance. By obeying the rules, this means submitting to the orders of the German, I consider was a certain part of resistance. We are trying to take away from German hands the strong practice of killing and executing by obeying. This worked in the beginning, and later on the, the Jewish uh uh--------, you know, like the Jewish commander was trying even to go and use bribe system. They took the bribe, but nothing changed. Now you're going to the que-next question was-- It was about a time when you were hiding and you knew you were going to--tell me what was happening--- Now, you see, this happened in 1943 when they were liquidated the ghetto. I, my wife and myself and a friend of mine, Dr. Alexandrovich decide to escape from ghetto through the canal. Coincidentally, the action was going so fast, when I was trying to reach Dr. Alexandrovich, a dear friend of mine, and his wife and his child, they already went to the canals, and when I, when I arrived to the canals was no way to get in, the German already disco-discovered the canals exit, and they kill everybody whom they caught over there, so when I came back to my apt, the one of the apt, there was a one room, kitchen room, I notice my wife is gone. So, I ran outside looking where she is and they told me they saw her going out from the ghetto toward the Plazov camp, who was built over there on Jewish cemetery. They destroyed Jewish Cemetery, and they built barracks because the commandant who was appointment, appointed by the Gestapo, uh, ---------- Fuehrer uh Armand Gette, he, he selected this place as the best place for Jews because they can be buried there right away on the cemetery, that was his expression. And Armand, Armand Gette, this last day, I would say, I was the last Jew alive who left the Krakow ghetto. I was trying to hide and figure out when the action will be over, I can go to my friends in the city, and stay outside, and eventually this way I can help my wife who will be in the camp. But they were going from house to house with 2 dogs. And they were ss--trying to trace all the Jews who were hiding, and I say, hiding behind a special wall, what I was thinking would be good protection, but later on, I found out it will be not a good protection against the dogs. I saw them pulling a woman and a child. They shot the woman and they killed the child by sli--taking the child by the legs and hitting the wall. Then I decide to step, and I knew that probably my min--last minutes of my life, but I didn't want to kill, be killed over there in the hiding place, and I s--decide to figure out how I can protect myself, and I know little bit mentality of the soldiers of and the officer, so they, when somebody gets some order and fulfill the or-order, then they have to respect it. So I start to take the bundles what was laying all around on the street and put them on one, in one place, and when they came to me close enough, about 4 or 5 feet, I turned to them, and in German, I reported to them that I was appointed here by one of the officer to clean the road so that the ---------will be open. There were no cars there, there were not horses, there was nothing there. They start to laugh, but they figure out, the guy just got the order, so he's doing the order, so he told me in German ------------, this means, "Get lost." I did not run, I turned around, clicked with my heels, and slowly left, don't even turning my head behind, because I knew when I turn my head, maybe will will will get a bullet in the back of the head. And then I turned to the next corner, and I was the last Jew alive, with the last group of about 40 people left the ghetto.
Describe the going in and out of the ghetto and the little code where you for how many people had been executed on the hill, the little word in and out of the ghetto, 60-0.
Oh, this was in camp already when we were in camp. In the camp, we play a little game. And the game was very simple one. We count how many people were killed in the camp, and how many Germans was killed in the camp as a revenge. The history was like this, when a, when a group of 60 people in camp from a table, and they caught food on them, they took them all to the hills, and they executed, and this day was 60 to 0. Some days was 2 to 0. Some were 15 to 0. Some was 3 to 0. Every day was something happening in the camp, so when people were coming from outside, they said, "What is this, how is today, what is the mood?" "Oh today was 3 to 0." "Oh this is good, only 3." But one day, because we killed one guy.
Wait till we reload. We have to do that one again.
Beep.
Okay tell me again the story of giving the statistics as though you haven't told me before. I haven't heard this story.
In, in the camp, from the first day we arrive, the mentality of the German was to create a condition that people will suffer and, and die. The execution was almost on daily basis. Some of those people were working outside and the group were going out 6 o clock in the morning, returning 6 o clock in the evening back to the camp. And the people who were outside were in a better situation than the people who were inside the camp because we, inside the camp they have to live through the whole experience what is going in the camp, and the killing was going over there. When some group came in like 60 people from ----------came in and they found food on them, they sent them to the hills and executed the people, and we called this 60 to 0. This means 60 our Jewish people were killed, not one German. There were 2 to 0, 15 to 0, 20 to 0, one day, when they came outside, we said, today was 21 to 1. One of the boy who was led to the execution jumped on the German guard, pulled out the bayonet and killed this guard while he was killed too, but at least was one German perish -------------one of the helper of the German was Ukrainian soldier. Now this was a situation what was like a game, but this was a very deadly game. Armand Gette would, would stay on his balcony with a rifle, from early in the morning, sometime afternoon, with a rifle, and picking up people and run them, and shoot them from balcony to create a, a tremendous pressure of people who were working outside because nobody knew when he can appear with a pistol or with a rifle. He was going from a one uh, uh barrack, working barrack like an uh, uh mechanical barrack, and he didn't like somebody who was doing the job too slow, he pull a gun and shoot them on the spot. He didn't like somebody walking through the camp, he has two dogs, who were trained to kill, he let the dogs uh tear the, the person to pieces. So there were every minute, every day from morning till we woke up till the day we went to bed, and at night something always happens.
Was there, in your experience, any physical resistance in the camp?
In this particular camp, there were very, I don't think so were any big resistance what I knew about this. No. There were maybe individual people who tried to escape on their own. Some of them escaped. Very few. Some of them got caught, and they were hanged, and for anything was only one penalty, penalty of death. So, the, in the German camps, in the Plazov camp, they were not organized resis--resistance, uh to, to do something. No, I don't think so.
What about mental resistance?
There were a lot of mental resistance because the, even those people who were kil--led to the death, to the execution place, they were going over there with dignity. They never begged for, for anything, they didn't ask for anything. They died with dignity, and I consider this resistance. One case what I can tell that's stuck in my mind, on Yom Kippur day, in 1944, they were always selecting the hardest jobs for the people. And I, we woke up in the morning, was dark because it was in October, and I noticed father and son was praying, religious Jews, pray, they, lots of Jews were praying, because there were lots of religious Jews, but not so openly, they were standing on the side of a barrack facing Jerusalem and they were playing uh, uh praying, and they German came, he said, "Los, los, to work!" and they didn't move, they were in such uh contemplation and such a spiritual moment, they maybe didn't hear this guy, he pulled a gun, and shoot father and son. That, I consider this was a tremendous resistance because they could save their lives if they would start working, but they were praying and they were talking to God, they forget about anything else. This was a resistance in my opinion.
What other kinds of resistance did, were there friendships, did you keep each other's spirits up?
The friendship between the people was tremendous, everybody was trying to help each other. When somebody was, my wife, for example told me one day she didn't felt, feel well, so the group of five girls who were staying in the line, were holding her so she shouldn't fall down or fainted or something because it will be automatically sent to for execution or in, in, in Auschwitz, to the gas chamber. So, there tremendous friendship, and everybody was trying to help each other, morally and even physically.
Tell me about friendship between men that you knew about. When you were alone with men in camps, did you have close friends.
We have, I have few close friends, very close, we were all very close, we know each other, but I was in a much luckier position, uh, uh much lucky because I was a professor before the war, and I was teaching in every Jewish gymnasium in Krakow, and lot of my students were in ---------, and they were a very, very close friend, and I tried to help them as much, and they were trying to help me, and many times happened that they helped me in, in, in, in the ghetto, for example, one of my students was a, in the police, in the out there, he asked and beg the German to let me go because I was already in a transport to go, and they let him uh, the to the-----------this is a very important person, and he, he let me out, but you see, the, the, the, the respect and love was tremendous. The same between the women, between the men and women, between the families who were there, because the family was still over there, not every family was completely torn apart. I was with my wife in Plashow. Coincidentally, my family, my mother, my father, my sister, my brother-in-law, they were already in a different part of, of the country. They went to the Eastern part of the country and I never saw them again. So, it's very, it was a, a tremendous support one to each other.
Talk about keeping each other's hopes up and how rumors would help. Like once there was a rumor of food coming from Switzerland. Do you remember that?
From Switzerland? Maybe from Hungary. Rumor about what?
Food coming in.
I know the whole story------------. There were rumors that we would get some support from Switzerland, but the rumors were only rumors, it's true, we got some food, and there were uh rotten cheese, and some rotten marmalade, that's all. Where the money went, what's the Red Cross from Switzerland and Jewish organizations was donated, I don't want to know, I don't want to be in it, the history is written by Israeli government, let's somebody who wants to find out exactly what happened, they can find out with ---------------. I don't want to point fingers at anybody.
Okay. A lot of times people believe there was no resistance in camps. How would you react to that?
