Interview with Andrew Glass
February 14, 2005 Beginning Tape One, Side A
Question: This is the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum volunteer collection interview with Andrew Glass, conducted by Gail Schwartz on February 14th, 2005, in Washington, D.C.. This is tape number one, side A. Please give us your full name.
Answer: I’m Andrew James Glass. The James, by the way is from my parental grandfather Jacob, who was shot by the Nazis.
Q: And the name that you were b -- given at birth?
A: The same. The Polish version of my name is Andrej, which is spelled A-n-d-r-e-j, and as -- as in most Slavic countries there’s also, for children and friends a dimunitive, and the dimunitive for Andrew or Andrej in Polish is Andrush.
Q: And what is your date of birth?
A: I was born November 30th, 1935.
Q: And where were you born?
A: In downtown Warsaw, Poland, not in a hospital.
Q: A-Actually at home?
A: Yes, and I visited th -- my place of birth as it were, and that is a story in itself, how as -- as we know, Warsaw was systematically destroyed by the Germans, but my house survived, and I’ll explain a little bit later, if you care, why.
Q: What was the address of the house?
A: Six Lvovaska Street. That’s spelled L-v-o-v-a-s-k-a, and it is in the heart of -- of Warsaw.
Q: Let’s now talk a little bit about your family, the previous generations, how far back that you know about and where they lived and so forth.
A: My family on both my mother’s and father’s side are Polish. My father’s family lived in Warsaw. We have the names of those who were my grandfather and great-grandfather and great-great-gran-grandfather. Going back I think to the latter part of the 18th century. And I think my mother’s family was also Polish, although sh -- as a -- as a girl she lived in Moscow during World War I. My father’s father, Jacob was a banker, and he was totally assimilated in the Polish culture, he -- although the family was Jewish, they regarded themselves first as Poles and second as Jews. Remember that in the Warsaw of 1939, one third of the population was Jewish. It was very much of the -- a Jewish -- a center of Jewish culture and life. And my grandfather was a very successful banker in Warsaw. One of the wealthiest men in Warsaw at the time.
Q: And did he spell his name G-l-a-s-s also?
A: Yes, Glass. I think i-in Polish probably the pronunciation is di -- slightly different, slightly harder, but the spelling is the same.
Q: An-And your mother’s family?
A: My mother’s family, my ra -- ma -- sorry. My maternal grandfather died at 55, although my grandmother, interestingly sur -- not only survived the war, but managed to escape with us, and lived to 96, in New York. Her -- she had one brother, who is still alive and he and his wife also survived, separately from us, but are st-still alive, although they’ve lost their son who was born in Santa Domingo, and there’s a story there, too.
Q: Well, now let’s talk about your parents. What kind of work did your father do?
A: Well, my father was educated as a lawyer, he had a degree from Warsaw law school, and actually was in the same class as the former late Prime Minister of Israel, Begin, although I’m not sure they knew each other, but around the time that my father graduated, which was coincidental with around the time I was born, that is the mid-30’s, Polish a-anti-Semitism became much more pronounced in degrees. And as a result of that, he could not practice law in Poland. So I think he just managed real estate properties for my grandfather, including the one that we lived in, that I mentioned earlier.
Q: And wa -- did your mother work?
A: No, no. My mother, who is still alive, she was born in 1912, and so will be 93 this year, unhappily suffered from postpartum psychosis when I was born, so I didn’t see my mother -- although I didn’t hear about this until much later, until around the time that I was two, two and a half. Although she re-recovered quite well, and in a very stressful time as we know war is for anyone, managed without any mental problems. She’s had psychotic episodes since, but she’s come back from all of them.
Q: How did your parents meet?
A: I-In this climate of what might be called upper middle class, or even upper class Jews, there was -- e-everyone went to school together, starting at a -- at a young age, in their -- their -- my parents are almost exactly the same age. And these -- Polish Jewish assimilated culture, as it was explained to me, people did not pair off until they married. So they did things in groups, went into the woods to find -- excuse me -- edible mushrooms. Took vacations together, and -- as teenagers in -- at the Baltic in a resort known as Sopot, S-o-p-o-t. And then, in their early 20’s they paired off and my parents paired off and married. I think my father was -- my parents were 22 at the time. My father, by the way, was the youngest of six or seven, I for -- forget, two of whom survived the war, besides my father, but did not escape, they were -- they were in -- in the ge-German labor camps in Germany, two sisters. And at that time, un-under Polish Jewish tradition, you weren't supposed to marry until your sisters married. So this was an elopement because it was a-against the tradition of the family. But somehow i-it all worked out.
Q: How would you describe your parents? Di -- wha -- were they re-religious? It sounds like maybe they weren’t.
A: Li-li -- my father was not an observant Jew, nor is my mother. However, they insisted that I have a Jewish education and I was -- at that time we didn’t have Bar Mitzvahs, we had something called confirmation. So I went through about a seven year program at Temple Emmanuel on Fifth Avenue and 65th Street, which started actually shortly after I arrived in the United States, and ended when I was 13.
Q: So were they politically active in any way?
A: I wouldn’t say so. My --
Q: I-I’m talking about the very early years in Poland.
A: Oh, in Poland?
Q: Yeah.
A: No, no. There was no opportunity, other -- y-you know -- you -- you mean in terms of -- of the -- the Bund or something like that? No. They -- they were not, at all, no. A-A-As the war approached, as -- strike that -- as it became clear, or clearer that Poland was in jeopardy from an -- German attack, the Poles made some decisions which changed my parents fortunes greatly and to the worse. Pole -- the Polish government passed a decree in -- I believe in the summer or spring of 1939, which was aimed at Jews, and to a lesser extent at Germans who controlled almost all of Polish industry at the time, that hard currencies, non-zlotys, held abroad by Poles, had to be repatriated and converted to Polish money, the zloty. That law was, as you might imagine, not totally adhered to. In fact, there is now quite a number of cases involving funds that were put in Switzerland in secret accounts by precisely -- by contemporaries of my grandfather who were faced with this situation and whose heirs are now either receiving or just seeking to prove that -- that these funds were theirs. But any event, my grandfather had considerable sums abroad in -- particularly in Switzerland and in New York and London, i-in the order of millions of dollars. And in part because he was a Polish patriot and in part because he was fearful of not breaking the law, all of this money was repatriated to Poland, and there were no funds in New York, there were no funds in any other place. So, when my parents eventually arrived in New York with a one week visa to stay in the United States, they were -- they were destitute, pa -- financially destitute. Interestingly, my father -- a-as you recall, in 1939 there was a World’s Fair in New York, and the ability of Poles, particularly of -- of people of means to get U.S. visas to visit the World’s Fair was -- wa -- things kind of opened up, you could -- you could get a -- a visa to go to the World’s Fair, and you could take a ship from Poland or from France and come here tha -- in the summer of 1939. My father proposed to my grandfather that he -- when this law was passed, that he sign hi -- these assets over to my father and that my father come ostensibly to visit the World’s Fair, but he had the impression, which was probably correct, that if he was sitting in New York with four or five million dollars, that you could probably find a -- a ways and means not to get kicked out. But my grandfather vetoed the plan and I often wondered how my life would have changed if -- for the better or for the worse, had he said, all right, go to New York, and if they had arrived in New York in that fashion rather than in the rather different circumstances that brought us to the United States.
Q: Did your parents ever talk to you later about anti-Se-Semitism that they experienced when you were still too young, obviously to know about it, before September ’39? Did they tell you of any incidents that happened?
A: Well, as I said, he was unable to -- to practice hi -- the profession to which he was trained, but --
Q: Any specific personal -- do you know what I mean? Very, very personal instances?
A: I don’t think so because they were living in -- in -- pretty much in isolation. Now, I put isolation in quotes because if you have a -- a million fellow Jews in Warsaw, you can find your way around. My father’s resentment against Poland, which he held until his death in 1993, was really centered around Polish anti-S-Semitism that was displayed after the war began, and during the war. And he wrote many letters, some to the New York Times, some of -- of which were published, to the Jewish publications and so on and was e-extremely active in Jewish charities during his life and gave a -- a -- particularly the United Jewish Appeal. And so his -- his resentment was that [indecipherable] resentment is that the Poles aided and abetted the systematic slaughter of Polish Jews.
Q: What is your very first memory? You said you were born in November ’35, so what di -- can you recall the very first memory?
