Helen Gilmer, 2/31/89
WH: . . . which town?
HG: . . . Baranovich . . .near Yashiva, in Dumya? I’m from a small town in Katowice . . .
WH: . . . .they took your husband?
HG: My husband.
WH: Where were you born? What year?
HG: In ’22 . . .
WH: So when this happened, you were about 20 years old and you were already married.
HG: . . . we were in a labor camp. . .
WH: . . . what were you doing in the labor camp, what kind of work?
HG: Well, I know a little how to sew.
WH: . . . you have brothers and sisters?
HG: I had four sisters and a brother . . .
WH: And did they survive? You’re the only one?
HG: Right.
WH: And your parents didn’t make it?
HG: (very heavy sigh)
WH: What about your husband?
HG: . . . they killed some and saved some. And I was almost from the list. And we knew they gonna kill us too. When I runned away, In the same day, I pushed out two sisters from the wires . . . (from the fence) . . . and we been talking always, you know, we saw that little by little we all gonna get killed, that maybe one will survive to remember, I never knew it’s gonna be me. And this was the last of us . . .
WH: . . . and how did you escape from the Labor Camp . . .
HG: . . . no one was watching . . .I escaped . . .i walked out from the wires and then went on . . .took me two weeks. I was running around by myself . . . I was lucky. I find some people . . . Jewish people. . . .
WH: So . . .if you were free in June, ’44, how did you know to come to the United States?
HG: . . . .everybody . . .went in his hometown. They let us free. They gave us documents that we made through the war, there and there, which they, you know, the government should know, who we are. When we came out from the woods, we were already free people. The Russian Army came to the jungle, and told us, “You are free. There’s no Germans around. And everybody went home.”
WH: . . . you were free in June, ’44 . . .you got married in the woods?
HG: Yes.
WH: What kind of wedding was it?
HG: I got married officially, by the Jewish law, in Austria in the D.P. camps . . . when I met my husband and we decided to get married, he had two brothers so I was already not by myself.
WH: Did you think at any time of going to Israel?
HG: Yes. I wanted ALL the time to go to Israel - cause I’m a Zionist, but my husband, since he went through all the wars. To start with, we couldn’t go nowhere cause Israel was closed – until ’48 . . . he was not ready, first of all, he was very weak. He still was weak . . .out then we already had contact with his relatives.
WH: So in ’48 you were already on the waiting list for America, so you figured – then you could have gone legally . . .we he from a Zionist family?
HG: I don’t think so . . .
WH: Do you think in some ways you would have been happier if you had gone to Israel? When you look today, back, on everything. Or are you happy with the way it turned out?
HG: Well, I had to go where my husband wanted to go.
WH: So you came by boat . . . left from Bremenhaven . . . the trip took two weeks . . .what was the trip like?
HG: I was so sick.
WH: . . .only Jews on the boat?
HG: As far as I know.
WH: What did you know about America?
HG: We didn’t know nothing.
WH: You just knew you’re going to –
HG: In the first place, we didn’t know the relatives, we didn’t know where we going, what we going to do.
WH: Where you worried about how they would accept you? The relatives?
HG: Yah. But we didn’t have no choice.
WH: Do you remember what it was like when you came into New York, into the Harbor?
HG: We came first to – New Orleans . . .
WH: Oh, tell me something, you acme to New Orleans –
HG: . . . the first ship who came to New Orleans.
WH: Later, if you could look it up, I’d like to know what the name of it is . . .the General – (HG produces a letter) can I see the letter, the word? Maybe I’ll recognize –
HG: The (she is searching the document for information) – The General Howze –
WH: Oh, that’s a famous boat.
HG: He got even the numbers.
WH: The number of what?
HG: On the ship-
WH: Let me ask you something, why would he keep that?
HG: I – don’t – know (she answers slowly).
WH: HE wrote it down then, and he kept it all these years. Right? That’s interesting . . .on this boat, was how many people?
HG: A lot. It was a big boat.
WH: And when you came into New Orleans, what did it look like? The boat sailed in, right, you came by the daytime?>
HG: First, I think a couple of days on the shore, they had to make our documents.
WH: They kept you on the shore, and you lived on the boat. How many people were in a room? Where you together?
HG: Oh – no. I was with my baby. My husband was separate.
WH: You were in a room by yourself or with other people?
HG: Was a bunker beds – and there was nobody with me. But just me and the baby.
WH: Who paid for the boat.
HG: I think my relatives. My husband’s relatives. They had to pay for the transportation.
WH: In the D.P. camp, it was hard, the life there? Was it boring? Or what?
HG: They gave us a room, they gave us food, and the gave us little cloths, clothes – which used to come from the United States. We, for – really didn’t have so bad because we did get help from different sources. We got help from the Joint, and from the Austrian . . .(inaudible) . . .my husband used to do a little business, like, you know, used to buy and sell.
WH: I understand, they call it “Black Market”.
HG: So, we didn’t have it bad. (inaudible) we had already the paper and the permission to go to America. Our neighbors came in and we had supper (laughs) and it happened to be a turkey! They said, (in Yiddis? Chaim - inaudible) “In America you not gonna have it!”
WH: You mean, they thought you had it better there! So tell me, when you came into New Orleans, you had to stay on the shore, do you remember seeing what the shore looked like from New Orleans?
HG: It was a very big – first of all, the music was playing for us.
WH: The music was playing for you. Who played the music?
HG: Must by the Joint – or the Jewish people – don’t know other people. It was ahhh, a lot of food, and people was playing music.
WH: A band? You mean, what? When you got off the boat?
HG: When we were still on the boat.
WH: When you were still on the boat they were playing the music. Who was playing the music? Or the shore you could hear it?
HG: Yah!
WH: What – all day?
HG: (inaudible) . . . two days.
WH: And for the whole day, they played music? A band?
HG: A band.
WH: You saw the band?
HG: Yes.
WH: What did it look like?
HG: (Inaudible)
WH: But they didn’t play for the whole day straight?
HG: I don’t remember exactly.
WH: But you remember they played.
HG: But we got here a nice welcome. And when we went down the ship – most people like Federations, prepared for us, it was a big hall and food and drinks and a welcome.
WH: Where? On the shore? Where was the food?
HG: We went down already.
WH: There was an inside hall? They too you into a (? zall?) .
HG: Yes, when we went up off from the ship.
WH: It was like a catered thing?
HG: Yes. It was fruits, and cookies were there, and drinks and everything.
WH: Where you religious then?
HG: I heard it was not (inaudible) to be not religious here . . . (inaudible).
HG: . . . we bought some clothes, bed clothes, everything we had.
WH: How did you get the trunk from the D.P. camp to Bremerhaven?
HG: Must be they picked it up from your house because that’s all when we traveled, that’s all we had is our suitcase.
WH: A big trunk. And you put milcnig and fleishg dishes in there?
HG: Yes . . .and pots and pans.
WH: Must have been heavy.
HG: Most important was I had a trunk.
WH: And what else did you have in the trunk. Clothing?
WH: We had bed clothes. Everything we bought, you know, because we could have afford – up there. I still have the down blankets and pillows, I brought with me.
WH: You still have it? How come you still have it? How come you still have it? Because it’s good, and still can use it?
WH: Yah.
WH: Interesting. So when you came, they had a band. And you came down there –
HG: And there we stayed maybe a couple of hours and they find out who goes where. We had tickets to go on the train to go to Atlanta. Some people came, and they took us to the train. And we was riding – that was for a whole night! And real early in the morning the train stopped, and our relatives was waiting for us. We even didn’t know how they looked. But they stayed at the door and they ask for us, and took us in the car – and they took us in our – (inaudible) house, and they were angels from heaven.
WH: Angles from heaven.
HG: (inaudible) It was a room special for us made. You know, in this house. With a bed, and a closet for the clothes, and a baby bed for the baby. The baby was 16 months old.
WH: Who was that – was that your son?
HG: My oldest daughter. I have two daughters.
WH: You have two daughters and a son?
HG: When we came, we just had one little girl – and they kept us in the house for 18 months. They didn’t want to let us go.
WH: What do you mean they didn’t want to let you go?
HG: They want us to learn a little the language because they said if we gonna move out we not gonna learn nothing. We gonna be (inaudible), they said we gonna be just like in New York. People don’t – live here 50 years and don’t know how to talk English.
WH: Were they your cousins?
HG: . . .no. Mrs. Newman was first cousin to my husband’s father.
WH: So it was really a little distant – that they were treated you like brother, sister.
HG: They had 5 children of their own, but they were all married. And, until today, some of them are died already, until today, they are the adopted sisters and brothers.
WH: It’s wonderful that they wars like that. When you first came, what you first took the train from New Orleans, what was the ride like? What did you think of America when you saw it?
HG: It was blank. We didn’t know what to expect.
WH: So what did it look like to you?
HG: It is more like we have (inaudible) the same thing we had here, or at home.
WH: Did anybody say anything to you, do you remember anything on the train, the porter, the person who took the suitcase.
HG: My aunt – we used to call her aunt – and Fanny said, “If you come in to my husband, you not gonna miss nothing. You gonna have everything the best.” He was a good man.
WH: Who said that?
HG: Her husband . . .the relative.
WH: Newman?
HG: She said, “You are lucky that – you came to such a good people like my husband.”
WH: . . . what part of Atlanta were you in?
HG: Southeast.
HW: The community there is no more now, right?
HG: No . . .the house is gone.
WH: And what did you husband do? What kind of work did he do?
HG: When we were in the D.P. camps, it was there a ORT, they tried to prepare – people for a (inaudible – future?) gob – he learned to be a welder – but when he came in here, they didn’t like the trade because it’s very bad for the eyes – and a son-in-law of the relatives had a factory which he made kitchen tables and chairs. So he said, “Ill take him, (hired?) and you gonna help, you’ll do something.” And he took him in and he was really helping, you know, whatever anybody want to bring to him, you know, in a factory. It was a factory. And my husband learned to upholster. So he made good money. To start with, he just made .75 cents an hour. But we stayed in this house, so we (inaudible) with no rent.
WH: And no food?
HG: No. We paid a little for the food, because we didn’t want to take advantage (inaudible).
WH: Did you work?
HG: I couldn’t go to work, I had my hands tied up in a little girl!
WH: Sure.
HG: So he made 75 cents an hour, but from that money I saved.
WH: From that little 75 cents an hour, you saved.
HG: First of all, whenever, if it was over-time, he worked. My husband was not a lazy guy. A Saturday, one of the sons had a grocery, so he used to go and stack up groceries. They paid him $10.00 a week . . .they paid him $10. for the say, so that was an extra ten dollar. And every time, it was vacation time, he received a double check. He didn’t took no vacation.
WH: Did you ever take a vacation in those years? The first 10, 20 years that you lived in America. Did you ever take a vacation?
HG: No!
WH: . . . so what happened – did you go to night school to learn English . . .
HG: . . .yes . .
WH: Did anybody say you had to go, or was it something that you want?
HG: No, no, I – we went. He used to come from work, and washed up and we walked, it was already – maybe 50 blocks –
WH: Fifty blocks you walked?
HG: We walked with the little girl.
WH: Why did you walk fifty blocks?
HG: Because it cost 10 cents car fare there . . .(inaudible) . . we saved 40 cents.
WH: You could have afforded it . . .
HG: Yes.
WH: But you weren’t sued to it – you wanted to save.
HG: Yah.
WH: What were you saving for?
HG: My husband had always ahh, goal to go into business.
WH: You wanted to save up to go into business.
HG: Yah (inaudible) . . .the upholstery, he made already a hundred dollar, a hundred twenty dollar a week . . . (inaudible) and we had 17 hundred dollar our own. (inaudible) and the relatives, we bought a business for 8 thousand dollars, and they signed for us. The relatives.
WH: The Newman’s?
HG: The Newman’s, the son-in-law and daughter.
WH: What kind of business?
HG: A grocery . . .(inaudible).
WH: Everybody I talked to here went into the grocery business. How come?
HG: Because we, all grocery people want to go out before we cam, ‘cause there’s no customers. When we came, he sold it to us.
WH: And after you took it over, was there customers?
HG: Yes.
WH: Ho come you brought in the customers, and they didn’t have it?
HG: They had it oo, but they were tired already and we treated very nice –
WH: Who did you buy the grocery store from?
HG: (inaudible) from my cousin?
WH: And the schvartzes like you?
HG: Yeh, because we treated them nice.
WH: How come you treated them so nice?
HG: Because they are people.
WH: And the other people didn’t feel that way?
HG: Yah.
WH: They didn’t understand them?
HG: Uh-uh (yes.)
WH: Maybe it was because of what you went through.
HG: No. No. they were very nice to us. Very nice, the schvartzes. And we made a nice living. We paid off –
WH: And you gave them credit if they needed it, and they needed it.
HG: We bought it with the credit. We bought a store, it had credit.
WH: I want to back to this. Why, if you’re going to go into business, and you could learn English from the Newman’s because you’re living with them, why shelp 50 blocks to learn English at night?
HG: That’s a funny things, I don’t know how otherwise we could learn.
WH: From the Newman’s . . . you talk every day . . .read or listen to radio.
HG: The children didn’t live with them, so it was just the old couple. She could hardly speak English herself then and he was busy, he used to help the children in the business cause they were already retired. And mostly we went to school and how much you learn in the time when I was in school – and (inaudible) with my little girl by my side. But we, they give us books, I used to come home and study. I used to sit at night after my baby went to sleep and learn how to write, and they had a maid in the house and she had – anything I couldn’t pronounce, she helped me. And my uncle, you know that’ my aunt who brought us here, he used to say, “Chayke? You don’t need to know how to write and read! My Fanny still doesn’t know how to make a check!” After being here for – fifty years. I said, “I have to know” and really, I was (inaudible - ? pestered?) and my husband because he was (inaudible –weakened).
WH: . . . and the school . . .all the other people were from Europe?
HG: Yeh . . .we came in the same time. . .
WH: So what do you think now, when you see the Russians coming in, the Russian Jews? Is it the same?
HG: No. NO. See, we came, we didn’t leave nothing behind. We were happy with whatever (inaudible “the guy” or “G-d”) give me. Whatever we find in here –
WH: It was better than there . . .
HG: They come in with education, they had a normal life over there, and they are very unhappy when they come in – it’s not like us.
WH: Do you think they’re more spoiled?
HG: Not as spoiled, but they came from a normal life . . .
WH: . . . your working in the grocery, it’s now the early 1950s, you bought the grocery, did you live above the grocery?
HG: No.
WH: You lived some place else?
HG: Yes.
WH: When you came home, what time did you usually come home from the grocery?
HG: We closed 8 o’clock at night.
WH: What did you do when you came home? You ate?
HG: And go to sleep. The children were already –
WH: Go to sleep, and the next morning, again in the grocery. And how many days a week were you open? Seven?
HG: (Signals – yes?) /
WH: Hard work. What did you ever do for fun?
HG: What fun? Sunday we were open a half a day, that was –
WH: So what did you do in an afternoon?
HG: We used to go to the park.
WH: With the children?
HG: With the children, (inaudible) all of us, mostly all of us used to come and we had fun together. All the greeners.
WH: All the greeners came to the same place in the park? And what was it like there, in the park? You all got together in one place?
HG: One place.
WH: Where was it? Where in the park was it?
HG: Piedmont park.
WH: . . .where in the Park? By a fountain . . .?
HG: Yeh, near a fountain where they already sold there hot dogs.
WH: Hot dogs. And what did you do there in the park when you got together?
HG: Well, there was some way – it was a place to swing, the children used to play in the water. And we was talking, and talking about business, and talking about different things.
WH: Like what? The family?
HG: Yes.
WH: Talk about Europe?
HG: No, no Europe.
WH: Didn’t talk about Europe?
HG: Europe – it –it- it’s gone for good. (inaudible) me and my husband, we would never think about (inaudible) – that’s all that’s left is bad memories.
WH: (inaudible) Did you talk about it with other the people what happened?
HG: (Inaudible) Yeh.
WH: What you went through, and how in America people don’t appreciate it, don’t understand it.
HG: The American people, people jealous of us. We did better than them.
WH: They were jealous. How did you know they were jealous? Did they ever say anything?
HG: They said.
WH: What did they say?
HG: They said, because we worked so hard and we made it. And we bought nice homes, and we bought – we had nice cars, we gave our children education, they couldn’t do this.
WH: Even though they were here longer.
HG: They didn’t have it.
WH: Why couldn’t they do it?
HG: ‘cause they didn’t work like us.
WH: They didn’t work six and a half days a week. So what did you say to them when they told you this?
HG: Nothing, too bad – too bad.
WH: too bad.
HG: We did better than they did. Much better.
WH: Even today. With the children you think you did better too?
HG: Yah, we gave our – they are in, in this generation already everybody sends the children to college.
WH: Did you feel that education was very important?
HG: Yes, yes. Because I guess I learned it from my parents – went through the First World War and they got (inaudible –destroyed?) not once, and they said, “Everything, it’s nothing. Just education. Because that’s what you got always with you. Nobody can take it away from you”
WH: When you came here, you . . got together on Sunday in the park, did your husband play ball with your son?
HG: No. My son played because we belonged to the Community Center and they used to have, you know, games. We took him there.
WH: Would you say that you dressed differently than the people who were Americans, in other words, today people go to the park – they put on a pair of shorts.
HG: Yah.
WH: Did you husband put on a pair of shorts also?
HG: Yah, sure, sure. When we were –
WH: Just like other people.
HG: Yah, yeah, yeah.
WH: And did they have benches there for people to sit?
HG: Yeah. Picnics and benches, and later on we used to –after we graduated from this park, we used to go to a lake some where . . .about 10, 20, 30 miles from home.
WH: . . . when did you go to the lake? On Sunday?
HG: Yeah. But then, we closed already, you know sometime we used to close. My husband didn’t like to work on Sunday. But we had to have the money, so, we did it. But otherwise we used to go like, to Carraway Garden, we used to wake up in the morning . . .and take the children, and take some food (inaudible) us. And there we went
WH: How many of you?
HG: Ten families, fifteen families, more or less, not everybody came.
WH: And these were all people that you knew from the neighborhood?
HG: Form our “greeners” not from the neighborhood.
WH: . . . your greeners meant from which country?
HG: With which we came from the same time, you know –
WH: . . . did it matter if somebody was Polish, or (inaudible)?
HG: No, no, no, no (inaudible).
WH: And your common language was Yiddish?
HG: Yes.
WH: So you could communicate.
HG: Yes. And we sent the children to colleges, and (inaudible).
WH: You went to the lake . . .and what would you do? You’d call up and say I’ll meet you there at the lake?
HG: Yeah. We used to talk over (inaudible) our activities.
WH: You used to go to a different place every time?
HG: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
WH: Did you ever go to the movies?
HG: Yeah, sure.
WH: And when you went to the movies, did you go with other couples?
HG: Yes, we had a crowd . . .(inaudible) we used to go in the same car, We used to get together . . .very often during wintertime we used to make parties every time in ahhh different house.
WH: Did you make friends with people who were American Jews, or mostly not?
HG: Not much. Not much. They were always, the Americans –
WH: Where they snobs?
HG: They were jealous.
WH: Did they think that they were better because they were born here?
HG: I don’t know. I really don’t know. I know one time my oldest daughter came in and she cried, she says, “That and that girl, she didn’t used to invite her – to play houses from her.” She says, “She don’t want to play with me” I said, “Why don’t you want to (inaudible)” “Because we was working (inaudible) her parents made ammunition for the Germans to kill the Jews. She must have heard her parents talking, cause they was little children. So she heard that our newcomers saw them work in the factories from the Germans, which was true.
WH: So what choice did you have?
HG: But, but see, it happened that we were not this kind of people. But children are children. (inaudible) the little girl heard her parents.
WH: Say that, that you worked to make ammunition. That’s, that’s – to think that you would come to this country after everything that you went through, and they would call you a Nazi.
HG: . . . even the children tried to be friends each with the other.
WH: Your children didn’t feel that they were prejudiced, realy, against them?
HGL No. But they by other – mostly they made friends with (inaudible) the newcomer’s
WH: . . . you live in this house – for how many years?
HG: 33 years.
WH: So you moved here pretty early.
HG: Yes. My husband, let him rest in peace, he said – he had to have everything the best. Because he can afford it, he showed off plenty. So he wanted everything the best, and he had. He had the first automobile, and he had he first then, a good house.
WH: So he must have done more than the grocer, right? Did he buy land afterwards? He bought some real estate?
HG: Yeah. That, this was in style. It was periods. First was groceries. And then it was, people used to and pick a house, you know, to buy (need?) and sell and buy a little cheaper. Everybody used to make it, so we cal sell it cheaper. Then it was some people (inaudible) . . .went to build houses, build apartments . . . and then it was in (inaudible) style, buy or rent. But, like I said, he had to have everything the best so he didn’t have no money. So what he did, his credit was good because we always paid the bills, first of all we paid the bills. So his credit was good, so he used to go the bank and borrow money, he’d find there a place where the white people moving out, and the colored people moving in, so he bought cheap houses. And so, -but this is nothing much. I still have the houses. Which is just trouble for me. But –
WH: He bought the houses?
HG: He bought the houses and I still have it.
WH: You say he had to have everything the best, so he didn’t have money left over to buy.
HG: That’s right.
WH: But he did buy.
HG: He did buy it because he didn’t put in his own. He used to borrow in the bank. And buy, and then pay out, and then buy again. And this time, one time he bought a bigger piece of property, he bought a theatre, and then he sold it, and he sold the store, and he bought another store. He didn’t stay in one place. And he accumulated a few dollars. So, he said, well, he was looking in the newspaper and he say, looked, what can he buy and he you know, it was a agent. And he (inaudible) called the agent and he said, he didn’t tell him how much money he got, we had very little. And he said, let’s go see, and he used to go out with the agent’s and see what was is for sale, what’s the market. And he did find something he wanted to buy. But the way I figured out, a little money we’ll pay down, how we gonna meet the payments, because id didn’t see such a money coming in. I should save it. We never saved any. So, I said, “Well, if you won’t buy it, maybe you should find us a partner.” And he had a friend which he – was a builder. He was building, and I said, “Well, if you buying from that and that man, maybe, you’re going to develop it” And he listened to me. And (inaudible) here’s already come a down payment (inaudible) . . .he took our friend to see it, and he said, “Cnaim, you want a partner, I’ll be one” And they developed it. Because it was a big risk . . . (inaudible) . . .it was not developed land and we bought it in partners, and we paid. It took us ten years to pay out . . .when we got though paying, it was worth a fortune! We bought it from $3,000 dollars, or three and a half thousand dollar . . . and it was worth ten and twelve thousand dollar a acre, fifteen thousand dollar a acre, it – the town went this direction, umpf. Oy! (heavy sigh). So my husband said, “You see, what you did? We give up there a loaf of bread. And we sold the house. And we still own the land, we reserved it for to build apartments. But for some reason we didn’t so it . . . (inaudible) . . . it was a big piece of land. And my husband he was already a partner to this one, with a friend came in here and said, “It’s there and there a piece of land, let’s buy it, and let’s build apartments” My husband said, “Good” But he (inaudible) build, and the partners put them up. He was not a friend anymore.
WH: He was greedy.
HG: He stole in the eyes. And my husband took in one of his relatives here, and America man, it would be a partner because it was a big project, and it was no good. So when the project was done, my husband said, “I don’t want to have nothing to do with you. Keep the apartments, and give me the land” So he paid him, I don’t remember, $15,000 an acre – he bought it for $3,000. And he went out. But until the switch came, my husband died . . . and I sold it about 5 years ago.
WH: Do you know Harold Hirsch . . .?
HG: Yes.
WH: Do you know Jerry Cooper?
HG: I know him.
WH: When you assess it, when you look at it, what do think was the difference between these two types of people? Herry Cooper, he didn’t make it. They had a lot of problems.
GH: I’m going to tell you. The success, every successful plan, have a successful man behind him. I went with my husband, step by step. I stood with him always (inaudible) . . . thanks me, that I stayed in the store, he could go places. Cooper didn’t have it. I saved every penny. When we started out in business, I bought a pair of shoes in a-pair of sandals for .50 cents. I didn’t have no stockings. And then I went to a store, in a 5 and 10 cent store, bought a remnant and made me a dress. I used to wash out at night, and tomorrow morning, I dressed again. To save (inaudible) – to save the dollar. And that’s what it is.
WH: . . . what happened to your children?
HG: They all graduated from college.
WH: Here? Georgia state?
HG: Yes. My oldest one got master’s . . . in education and she teaches.
WH: Your second daughter?
HG: . . .she took advertisement. She was brilliant. She’s work here. She got a big job. She works here for a color company . . . she had it for ten years. She makes a nice living.
WH: Is she married?
HG: Yes. She has two children.
HW: Nice husband?
HG: Yes, he’s not so lucky, but, when she married him, he still was in school. She married a Polish guy, from Poland . . . (inaudible).
WH: Jewish?
HG: Yeah. About ten years ago . . . he graduated from Georgia Tech . . .he’s a snomer snappas . . . she make the living.
WH: . . .and your oldest daughter, is she married?
HG: Yeah.
HW: She married a nice fellow?
HG: Yeh, he’s a pharmacist. But his career was in the Air Force . . .
WH: He’s also Jewish?
HG: Yeah, sure.
WH: And your son, Steven?
HG: Oye, he got a wife, kina hora.
WH: Nice wife?
HG: Yeah.
WH: Were do they live?
HG: They live in here, they have two lovely children. And she’s a very sweet girl. They never dated non-Jews. None of my children.
WH: Do you feel that you gave then – you told them that, that if they married someone not Jewish you’d be very upset?
HG: I didn’t have to tell them . . .they had Jewish (? education?) and at home we have a Jewish life, so they knew.
WH: What does he do Steve, he runs the store?
HG: It’s his business . . .he graduates not to go in a business like that, but it happened that soon he went out from school, my husband died.
WH: But you still have property?
HG: Yah. Very little, the schvartze, which is –gives me more trouble, the place.
WH: Who manages it?
HG: I don’t have so much. It’s a few houses.
WH: So you manage it?
HG: Yeh.
WH: You collect rent.
HG: Yeah. They pay not much, but I cannot get rid of it.
HW: Nobody wants to buy it.
HG: Nobody . . .
WH: Do you think that what happened in Europe could happen here?
HG: (sighs) yes.
WH: You do.
HG: Yes, because the anti-Semitism is very big.
WH: You still feel it?
HG: Yes.
WH: How do you know?
WH: Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes. And the schvartzes are very jealous. And that’s what we have, big people in the government and in every where, they say nothing.
WH: Do you think an Andrew Young is an anti-Semite?
HG: (inaudible)
WH: . . . one hides it better than the other.
HG: Yeah.
WH: What about, like when you work with them in the store? Do you ever see anything, did they say anything?
HG: Yeah! “We working, and you getting the money!”
WH: That’s what they say to you?
HG: Yeah.
WH: But they still work for you.
HG: The people which work here (inaudible, - “You have it! You have it! You got it!” That’s what we worked seven days a wee –
WH: But you worked very hard for it.
HG: That’s right. And saved every penny, and paid bills, this they don’t want to know.
WH: At least those that work for you at least they’re working. At least they’re not on welfare.
HG: (inaudible) they getting paid. We treat them very nice. We treat them like people.
WH: Do you think they appreciate it?
HG: Some do.
WH: Do you ever think about how the Holocaust could have happened, if there is a G-d?
HG: See, the anti-Semitism, if you – the same thing was in Germany. They said that there’s be - these people, these Jewish people are rich and take away every thing from us. If – in here, they’ll stop to do it, if (inaudible) is very easy to persuade.
WH: (inaudible) . . . in there’s a G-d in Heaven, right, do you believe there’s a G-d in Heaven?
HG: Yes.
WH: How do you think it was possible, though, don’t you ever ask that question?
HG: This was what my husband used to say, but still he raised the children in the Jewish faith.
WH: Why? Why did he raise them Jewish?
HG: Because his father raised him Jewish. And you cannot escape from Jewishness. He was born a Jew. And you’ll die a Jews, and we saw – and we saw that Hitler find the third generation which they put in concentration camps, people which they didn’t know they are Jewish. So you are born Jew, and you’ll die a Jew, and you better be a good Jew. That’s my, my –
WH: What did he say when you ask, “How G-d could let this happen?”
HG: Really, he – my husband used to say, “Where was G-d?” In his hometown you know, there was a very religious rabbi, a smart – you know. And, he said, “How could G-d do that to those kind of people?” But I still say that, I do to classes in shul, and I read, you know, -
WH: What shul do you go to?
HG: Beth Jacob . . . and I learned in Hebrew School just like where I send my children. You know, at home, all the Jewish children used to go in the public school, and in Hebrew school. G-d couldn’t do it. Turned it, turned away the face. He didn’t see it. He punished the people, because it was the (inaudible).
WH: . . . Kahane? You support him. You like him.
HG: Because he tells the truth . . .the Arabs they multiply so fast, and they gonna be the majority. And it’s not good.
WH: And they don’t want to live in peace, you don’t think.
HG: They’re not gonna be peace, because before Israel, there was Israel before, they used to kill any Jew they saw.
WH: When you get down to it, though, this is still a pretty good country, right? America?
HG: America – the (inaudible)
WH: Even with the anti-Semitism.
HG: With the anti-Semitism. There are bitter feelings. So bad yet.
WH: Do you think anti-Semitism will ever stop?
HG: NO!
WH: Why not?
HG: Because there are people who want to leaders, and they look upon way to, to, to get up a crowd and that’s a good way.
