Interview with Shelly Rothschild-Sherwin
March 15, 2001 Beginning Tape One, Side A
Question: United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, Jeff and Toby Herr collection, this is an interview with Shelly Sherwin, conducted by Regina Baier on March 15th, 2001, in Mrs. Sherwin’s home in Santa Monica, California. Mrs. Sherwin is the daughter of Blanka Rothschild, a Holocaust survivor who has been interviewed for the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum’s oral history collection. This interview is part of the USHMM’s post Holocaust interviews -- post Holocaust interview project. The US Holocaust Memorial Museum gratefully acknowledges Jeff and Toby Herr for making this interview possible. This is tape number one, side A. The first question is please give us your full name.
Answer: Formally, it’s Rochelle Ann Rothschild Sherwin. In college -- where I work, it’s Shelly Rothschild Sherwin.
Q: And when were you born and where?
A: I was born March third, 1951, in New York City.
Q: Were you named after somebody who died or was murdered during the war?
A: Yes. Rose was my father’s sister who died, and Ann, my middle name, was for my mother’s mother.
Q: Were you told anything about them? What do -- what -- what does it mean to you to be named after somebody? Is there any particular significance?
A: Well, a-aside from it being Jewish tradition to be named after a dead relative, I hope that I live up to what I -- the stories that I’ve heard about them.
Q: Give us an example.
A: My mother’s mother was a woman of great breeding and taste and refinement and culture, very family oriented. Very much in love with life and society and busy with philanthropic interests and family affairs.
Q: I know, of course, that memory goes only back so far, but it would be nice if we could go back into your earlier childhood and gets a sense of what -- what family life was, what -- what do you remember about your parents. So my first question would be, give our listeners who don’t know your parents a sense of who they were. Your father -- who did you see o-of -- ho-how did you see your father when you were younger, and how did you see your mother?
A: Well, my mother stayed at home, so I saw a lot more of her than my father, who worked very hard. My father, I always knew had family. I never met anyone of my mother’s family until I was eight years old and we met an aunt through marriage in Germany. I know that my mother took me abroad when I was, I believe one year old, but of course I don’t remember having met her then. But I never knew family from my mother’s side, which was a tremendous loss th-that I felt as a child. I knew that there was a huge, huge part of childhood experience, having grandparents and aunts and uncles and cousins missing from my life. I was very keenly, keenly aware of it.
Q: Did you -- let’s -- be-before -- well, let’s -- let’s follow up on this then, before I ask you again a little bit more about the personas of the -- the persons that your parents were. Ho-How did -- how -- did you -- how did you ask them about it? Did you ask your mother, how come I don’t have grandparents? How -- how did this evolve?
A: My father came before the war, so his experience was growing up in America from late teenage-hood on, here, as his brothers and sisters, who had been farmed out from Germany before the war. And they all had international experiences, some went to South America, some went to Palestine, some -- I mean, every brother and sister was sent to a different relative around the world. His parents both died before I got to know them, his mother outlived his father, and was alive when I was born, but also died when I was quite young. My mother’s side of the family only came through me -- to me verbally, because there were no -- no pictorial histories or scrapbooks, or mementos handed down. So it was only her stories and my imagination that gave them any kind of reality.
Q: How would she talk about them?
A: She talked about holidays that she remembered when she was growing up, what her family life was like. The talents of the various people. The intellectual capabilities, the accomplishments. Her family was very accomplished in many different fields. Sh -- and I think that’s why she had great hopes that I would be a pianist like one of her cousins who was world renowned. That didn’t do t -- I didn’t do too well there. Maybe a dancer. The Russian -- the Russian ballet instructor told my mother, save your money. So th -- so -- so there were -- there were quite a few talents that I did not pick up from her fa -- family side, but reading and education were certainly something that she impressed upon me and I developed my own curiosity in pursuing.
Q: Do you remember the circumstance of when you sort of first became aware of your mother’s experience during the war, when you realized she was a Holocaust survivor, although at that time you would not have thought about it in those terms, probably.
A: No, the dawning was gradual, but the visual indicator was always there. My mother was always physically very different than other mothers. Her physical disabilities worsened as I grew up, and it was because her condition was becoming much more visible and apparent to the outside world that then I came to understand that she had been born perfectly normal, but because of the beatings that she received in the camp, it was the cause of these physical abnormalities worsening.
Q: How did -- how did you learn about that, though? Did you ask her questions, or did she under certain condi -- circumstances talk about that? Ho-How did you learn about it?
A: There was never a special day that I remember, that was set aside to say this is what happened to me. It was, I think, always part of my consciousness. I think -- I remember one thing, one day I remembered seeing one of my friend’s parents who had a number on their arm, and I asked my mother why she didn’t have a number on her arm. So I knew that there was a commonality of experience that my friend’s parents had been in camps, and my mother had been in camp, but there was a difference. And I think that started the storytelling a bit more.
Q: Did you have -- you just mentioned your friends. Did you have Jewish friends and non-Jewish friends, or pretty much Jewish friends and were there si -- children of -- of survivors, other children of survivors among them too?
A: The area that I grew up in in the Bronx was a terrific mix of Jewish, Italian, Irish and in high school, black. But for th -- my earliest school experiences, I would say 95 percent of my classmates -- at that time New York used to place you in a class of your ability, so the classes were numbered one, two, three, four, so if you were in the first grade in the first class, that means that you were the most academically superior. So always being in that first class, it seemed that the make-up was 95 percent Jewish at that time.
Q: Did you talk -- did you have close friends, like really very close friends?
A: I still have them to this day.
Q: Oh, you do?
A: Yeah.
Q: Did -- did you talk to them -- were they children of Holocaust survivors too, by any chance?
A: The three friends that I have from when I was 10 years old were all American born and their parents were American born, so no, they -- they didn’t experience the particular childhood that I did. But I had other friends in the second circle of my -- of my associates that had Holocaust survivor parents.
Q: And did you talk to your friends about it, and to your best friends about -- about that in some way, did you feel that you wanted to? Did they ask? They probably got -- came home --
A: Sometimes I remember there were discussions at -- at -- at lunch about parents having nightmares and we would only discuss it amongst ourselves. My mother wasn’t one of those, but -- but I had a friend, Mary Chewbowski who used to tell me about her mother’s nightmares, and we were very protective of each other. It was almost a different circle of friends, the immigrant kids, then the other Jewish kids who really didn’t have any way of relating to what it was like to have to be a nurturing support to your elder parent. It was -- it was a role reversal even at a younger age that some of my friends had. My mother at that point was stronger than some of my friend’s parents, who were much more emotionally crippled at that stage, at that stage. My mother was stronger, but the years have taken their toll.
Q: Let’s stay in the earlier years a little bit. What do you remember from your family life? What di -- what did you do? What was the relationship between you and your parents?
A: I was an only child. I was told very early on that my mother had lost all her family, and when the doctors told her that she was not supposed to have a child, that her response was that she didn't survive the war not to have a child. So no matter what the physical cost was going to be -- which put a little guilt on me because I knew that she was taking a risk and did damage her condition further by bearing me, but that she felt that she lived for a purpose and the purpose was to have a family, and that was me, but there was only just me. So I didn’t have any brothers and sisters. I didn’t have any grandparents or cousins, or people from her side that she could relate to.
Q: When you look back, what kind of a child do you think you were? How do you see yourself as a -- as a -- as a younger child? I don’t want to lead you, just how did you see yourself?
A: My mother will probably say that I was spoiled, and I don’t think so. My -- I was -- I was -- I will admit that my parents were extraordinarily generous of their time and the amount of input that they put into my cultural awareness. I grew up in the Metropolitan Museum of Art, I tell everybody that I did. I -- I spent more time going to botanical gardens and zoos and Radio City Music Hall, and shows when I was young. And I turned around and did the same thing for my daughter because my -- my life -- my childhood was so full of extraordinary outings, that I couldn’t wait to turn around and do that when I had a child, so I -- my -- my social activities with my parents were extraordinary. Maybe that was to make up for lack of family affairs.
Q: I take it from your -- from what you just said, that you did not experience that necessarily as -- as a pressure, but more as an opportunity, or was it also sometimes a -- a -- a pressure behind this to -- to -- having to fulfill certain expectations?
A: No, I wasn’t -- I wasn’t exposed to these things necessarily to have them drummed into my psyche that this is what you must know in order to be a cultured person. Everything was on an equal basis. Going to the movies, or seeing the Rockettes was on the same level as going to a ballet. So everything was done with a sense of -- of fun and a special occasion, and dressing up and going downtown to Manhattan. So it was -- it -- it was never an expectation that I would be able to then recite to impress anybody what I had been exposed to. It was just something that would cu -- just culturally open me up to the rest of the world, outside of New York.
Q: When you went to the -- to the homes of your friends, did you perceive differences? Was your upbringing a different one? And if so in what -- in what way?
A: I always believed my parents to be much more strict than my mu -- than my friend’s parents who were American born. And we’re talking about my Jewish friends. Some of their parent were the -- brought up in the 40’s here, very liberal, virtually leaning on the Communist way, so that they were allowed to stay out late and make decisions for themselves when my parents said, we have to know where you are and who you’re with and what time you’re going to come back, and so I felt that there was much stronger bungee cords on my freedom than my par -- than my -- my peers experienced. Now that I’m a parent, I don’t know whether it wasn’t a good idea, cause I probably mimicked more than I -- than I want to admit. But no, my parents were more strict than my friends. And ma -- and my friends used to push me and my parents would explain to my friends why they did what they did. And ma -- and my friends respected and still respect my parents for doing that.
Q: Are your parents very different from each other? Are they -- how -- do you see them very differently?
A: Entirely differently.
Q: Describe the --
A: Entirely differently. My mother is the intellectual. My father is the very easygoing sense of humor. My mother is very nervous and ferociously protective. My father was strict, but yet, not as verbal about it as my mother was. But I didn’t want to cross any lines with my father.
Q: Let’s talk about your education a little bit. You -- what kind of schools did you go to in the beginning?
A: I went to public schools, New York public schools were wonderful at that time, and then to, as I said, keep broadening my field of reference, my parents would, on a very meager income, sacrifice and send me to Swiss schools for the summertime. I always say that there was a finishing school and th-they finished me off but good. I’m very polished, highly polished, to a g -- a great gloss.
Q: I detect the irony, of course, but -- but si -- say -- say a little bit more about that. Was it -- I mean, it was obviously a very different cultural experience [indecipherable] Europe.
A: Yes, I mean they sent me to -- they sent me to sleep away camps in the United States and -- when I was younger. Some of them were Jewish, some of them were not Jewish. My memories of them are that I -- I know that they sent me away from the city so I didn't have to bear the city heat. My -- before I was sent away to camp, we always went away -- my mother and I went to the Catskills, and my father would come up weekends, just like the other fathers would come up and visit, so that my summers were very pleasant. But then when I became of an age where there -- they wanted to also have some kind of growing experience, or benefit to be derived from a summer away, that’s when they looked into these schools in Switzerland for me, and I went to the same one for two summers in a row.
Q: Did you thi -- when you were in -- how old were you when you were in Switzerland, roughly?
A: I believe 14 and 15.
Q: Did that subject matter ever come up, being in Europe? I mean, Switzerland was neutral at the time, but sort of the Holocaust, did that ever come up?
A: The ho -- interesting, you know, the Holocaust itself did not. There were some Jewish children who came from very nouveau riche families in New York, and there were Arab children there as well whose -- the younger ones were being trained to hate anyone Jewish. The older ones my own age were a bit more tolerant. This is -- you -- you know where -- this was close to when Israel had been founded, so there was some leniency and understanding with the children my own age, but the younger ones were already being disciplined to avoid us, and they called us -- they called me the enemy. I re -- I remember that distinctly, that the younger wa -- younger ones would come up to the table when I was sitting with friends and they would say, how could you sit with the enemy? So it wasn’t the Holocaust, but it was being Jewish.
Q: Do you think it was difficult for your mother to let you go?
A: I’m -- I’m sure -- I’m sure fo -- for any mother of a single child, it’s difficult to let a child go, but you g -- you get tremendous satisfaction from seeing your child come back glowing with the experience. If they’ve had an unhappy experience, of course you carry that guilt with you also. But what could be terrible about spending the summer in Europe? So I had -- I had fabulous times, and it -- it certainly made a seed germinate that I wanted to study in Europe later on, which I did in university.
Q: Let’s stick with being a teenager a little bit. You sort of came of age in a kind of an interesting time. I mean, the 60’s were rolling around. What -- what had impact? I mean, there was so much happening at that time, what -- what -- what had an impact on you? What kind of music did you like? How were you as a teenager? A: I was a very -- I was a very typical teenager. I was as crazy about the Beatles as everybody else in America. Some of my American second generation friends were experimenting with drugs, and this is where the strictness factor came in with my parents, they -- they practically used to sniff out the backpacks of my friends when they came in, were very, very protective about what was coming into the house, and -- and what was be -- what activities were being engaged outside of the house. So I was not as brave, or as adventurous as some of my American friends because I didn’t want to upset my parents.
Q: In terms of social movements, was there anything that kind of had an impact on you, that sort of was important to you?
A: I wanted to belong. As an only child, I always wanted to belong. And when I started university, I thought I would pledge a sorority. And at the same time, at -- literally, simultaneously, at the time that I was going to be sworn in a secret ceremony into the sorority, there was a huge anti-war protest on my campus. And it was one of those lifetime awakening moments, and I said, you know what, what I’m doing right now is ridiculous. What’s happening outside is much more important, and I walked away from the sorority and I joined the anti-war movement.
Q: What did you do for them, or with them?
A: I -- I joined the student protests. I worked for Eugene McCarthy. I worked for Bobby Kennedy on -- especially when he was shot, I started my own initiative for gun control and I -- and I took ar-around a petition for signatures and then sent it to Washington. That’s when I started becoming politically engaged. I was just on the young end of being more radically involved in the anti-war movement. I was, but I certainly wasn’t the leader, I was more of a follower. And then as I became a bit more informed, I started working within political movements rather than the more radical ones that were happening on college campuses.
Q: I know of course that things don’t always work on that kind of simplistic, linear, logical order, but do you think that the experience of your -- that your awareness of your mother’s past and of the Holocaust and so on, and second World War had kind of sensitized you in a different way, or is that no -- is -- is that not -- set apart from it?
