United States Holocaust Memorial Museum Interview with Abe Resnick September 22, 1994
RG-50.030*0292
PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a videotaped interview with Abe Resnick, conducted by Randy Goldman on September 22, 1994 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview took place in Washington, DC and is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
ABE RESNICK
September 22, 1994
A: You want me also to spell out the name of the city or is that not necessary?
Q: I need you to begin by stating your name, where you were born, when you were born. A: Many years ago. Should I start?
Q: Yes.
A: My name is -- my real name when I was born is Abraham Resnickowitz (ph.). Actually -- people know me by Abe Resnick, actually. But that was my given name at the time. I was born 1924, February 27th. I was born in a small city -- small town in the eastern part -- the northeastern part of Lithuania by the name of . It was a relatively small town. It was actually a county more than a town, in the sense that there was some surrounding towns -- small towns which most of the time our town was famous in having a large -- not conventions, but I would say markets. People used to come from all over because you see, Lithuania was an agricultural country and in the larger towns we used to have twice a week, markets whereby people used to bring their agricultural products to the city and they were sold at the -- at the markets. I was born in a family that my father -- who was -- who came from a different town. He was also in the -- he fought in the Independence War of Lithuania. And due to the fact that he was fighting for Lithuanian he was given two choices; one, a farm or a governmental job. He decided what's a Jewish boy going to do on a farm? So he decided to take a governmental job. And the job was -- basically he was an insurance inspector.
Insurance was, in Lithuania, belonged to the government and regulated by the government. So he came to this small town. First of all, he came to the town, in the beginning, as a -- as a bookkeeper and -- and he worked for a company. And, of course, he met my mother who was a native and a fourth or fifth or six generation of people who lived in . That means my grandfather and my great great grandfather, they were established there for many years. After my father married he opened up his own business and the office was in the house. I had a very nice house and the address of the house -- of course, that's irrelevant.
Then when --
Q: But you had a very comfortable life.
A: I had a very comfortable life in the sense that we had a large family and we had many, many friends. And had even a Jewish bank in the town. There were out of the 6,000 people that lived in the town, I think 50 percent were Jewish. And it was -- had quite a few synagogues. It was a -- and the town was always known as a Habad (ph.) town which was now been known was as the . Incidentally, in 1933 the rabbi -- head rabbi from the movement -- came down to our town and it was a big, big event. I remember he came to the train station and he was carried through because he had a -- he was handicapped. And incidentally, my parents took me to him for a blessing and sometimes I say this blessing maybe was the one that saved me from all these difficulties that I went through in my life. Now, I had a younger sister -- two younger sisters. One was four years younger, the other one was eight years younger than myself. And the cultural life was very -- it was small city but it was very unique in the sense of the friendship and many, many -- large, large family -- plus the fact that we were also close to the border of Latvia. And I had an aunt who married into Dvinsk, which was about 50, 60 miles, but it was already in Latvia. So we had relatives that used to come in between Latvia and Lithuania. When I grew up, I went to public school. My parents decided to send me to Kovno, which was the -- which was the capital at that time of Lithuania.
Q: Before we get to Kovno -- as I understand it, your family was quite religious?
A: Yes, they were not that fanatics but they were -- they were -- the whole city -- those small cities were very much religious. People were -- there were exceptions who were not religious, most -- 99 percent were religious. Everybody used to belong to the synagogue and there were no reformed or conservative. There was one type of synagogue. They were Orthodox synagogues at that time.
Q: Did the Jewish population mix much with the --
A: Very much in the sense that they were mostly storekeepers and we had attorneys and we had dentists and we had a, like I mentioned we had a bank. And the head of the bank was -- also, of course, a Jewish bank and the bank mostly was also in a sense to help people need -- people in need and they used to also participate in charity and in helping people to establish themselves in new businesses.
Q: Jewish and non-Jewish?
A: Jewish and non-Jewish, right, yeah.
Q: Okay. What about political or organizations?
A: There were -- everybody was there . And many people -- incidentally, at that time, it didn't exist yet the State of Israel, but we had in quite a number of occasions, when leaders used to come down to our city to explain the necessity of having a -- having our own country and promote ideas.
Q: Okay. So you were beginning to tell me about moving to --
A: Yes, I moved -- actually I didn't move. My family still stayed on in and -- but I was sent to Kovno and at that time -- at the age of 12 or 13, I was sent to my grandparents who used to live in Kovno. And my parents felt very comfortable, the fact that I'm going to be living together with my grandparents and my uncle. And so they used to live almost on the main street, which was call . That means, in translating, the Alley of Independence. And I was right on the corner of and there used to live -- my grandparents used to live and we were very comfortable. And the fact that the school they put me in was also a gymnasium, which was about five minutes walking distance from where they used to live. And of course, I started going to the school. The schooling system was extremely well and this was -- the reason also they send me to Kovno, because in the small cities they didn't have Hebrew gymnasiums and this was a Hebrew gymnasium. And incidentally, this gymnasium was on the name of Chase because a benefactor by the name of Chase was the one that established -- from the United States -- was the one that established this gymnasium in the Kovno, the capital of Lithuania. So I went to the -- friends, had many friends. And we didn't have too much time, leisure time, because the system -- the education system was extremely, extremely serious and very disciplined. We used to have uniforms with a hat and a special outfit. And we basically started early in the morning and I used to come back home late and I had to make my homework and was very -- there was very little time to leisure. Of course, sometimes going to the movies, sometimes -- incidentally, I also lived next store, right around the corner to the opera, which I had very -- Lithuania was a small country but it had a very cultural -- the cultural life was very intense. And by having the opera around us and especially myself and also many of our friends were very much involved in the opera. Of course, we didn't have the money and the resources to go and sometimes to the opera but we always find a way to participate and to enjoy the cultural life and especially the opera and the ballet. And it was a beautiful, beautiful opera. And this was also was in a compound of a -- within a park, a city park. I also remember that I used to read quite a lot. And there was, of course, radio, what we had. And it was in the early stages. We didn't have, of course, TV or some other entertainment. So mostly our activities were basically around the community, around the synagogue, which was not too far also from us. Kovno was a city of about I would say 100 -- over 100,000 people -- out of about I would say 150,000. Out of them, maybe one-fourth, one-third was -- were Jewish people.
Q: You were in the main part of Kovno?
A: The main -- yes, in the main part, in the center -- in the center. And I remember that on Saturday, of course, the school -- there were no school and we used to walk. We had this , the street was composed of a median with benches and a place to walk and to enjoy. The climate was also very good in a certain way because we had -- we were almost the same parallel as Montreal, but other climate was a little bit milder in the sense, we had very harsh winters and very beautiful summers. And we really enjoyed the surroundings. In winter, we used to go skating and had some -- with sleds, you know. It used to be also beautiful in the sense that we used to go out and have the wintertime, you know, there's horses and sleds and it was a remarkable. It was a very interesting and very joyful life.
Q: What did the city look like?
A: The city was an extremely, extremely clean city. And the buildings, we didn't have any high-rise buildings. I think the tallest building was about four -- four-stories high. Most of them were about two stories. In the center of the city, of course, there were commercial buildings and also apartment buildings. We had also a number of . And then we had a remnant from when Lithuania was occupied by Russia. We had a place which was called the sabor (ph.). The sabor was like a church that was not functioning as a church, but it was like a -- like a remnant from the -- from the times and it was used, like, mostly as a museum. We had also few museums. It was also a military museum, which was called the . We had -- also the topography was very beautiful because we had, like, small mountains surrounding and we had two rivers, the and the . And of course, wintertime was very joyful. When they were frozen we used to enjoy skating and going around.
Q: What about Jewish life? A: Jewish life was very --
Q: I'm sorry. I need you to start again because I was talking.
A: I belonged to different -- not different -- there were not too many organizations -- Jewish organizations, mostly . And also at the same time, I belonged to the international organization, which was the Button Button (ph.), which were the boy scouts, which we enjoyed. We used to have outings and the outings were basically -- we used to go out to the forest and stay there -- over -- stay over. And also we were taught different -- different measures in relationship -- I mean, the essence of what does it mean to be a boy scout in Button Button. We also -- I remember we were taught also -- we used to wave with flags the morose code, by communicating which each other. It was the little flags like between two ships. Also, I remember we were also being educated and explained about -- about Palestine and about the activities that were at that time in Palestine about the influx of the amount of Jewish people to Palestine. Also, about times in Turkey, which were also -- some years ago that Turkey -- they had a very big influence on Palestine when they had -- they were in the Turkish occupation. We were very extremely well versed. And time went by and I used to go back to my -- in the summertime, I used to go back to join my family in . I remember I used to take the train. It would take forever. It was only about 200 miles. I don't remember, kilometers or miles. And then I used to join my family and I was very proud. People used to respect me very much for the fact that I am coming from my big city. My other friends were educated in our small city. Most of them went to Lithuanian schools and the relationship between the Jews and Lithuanians was very, very cordial, very nice, very friendly. And we had never had any -- any big sense of anti-semitism, at least we didn't feel that. Sometimes, in sporadic cases, there were certain -- certain acts of hostility, but very, very rare. And going back and forth and so we reached the time when I was -- reached eight. The last year was the eight class and this was the year when we -- I was going to finish the gymnasium and, of course, after gymnasium -- as you know, a gymnasium is like a -- translated in terms of American terms, it's like a partial college -- high school and college, whereby we had to take also and differentials and many items that were subjects that were being taken in -- in the university. I took Latin because we were able to take some foreign languages. I took -- Russian, I spoke because when I was born my parents finished Russian schools before Lithuania was independent. So I spoke, when I -- in the beginning I spoke Russian. And when I went to school in , I start speaking Yiddish and then, of course, Hebrew and then, of course, Lithuanian. And then I took German in school, I had to take. And then I took Latin because I -- my interest was to become a doctor and my parents wanted to sent me to Italy because the curriculum in Lithuanian was very small. We had a university, not too big, and it was very difficult to get into the university. So some friends of ours went to Italy and my aim was also to go to Italy after finishing the gymnasium. And of course, 1939, this was still before -- two years before I finished gymnasium, the Russians -- I mean, the turmoil in Europe started. The Russians have decided -- have to divide between German and Russia. Russia was going to take over the Baltics; Lithuania, Latvia, and Histonia (ph.). And Germany was to take part of Poland and, of course, Czechoslovakia and Austria, so far and so on. So it started already that -- soon we felt that there is something happening but we have never -- we were confident that our government, which was a democratic country with a president, a parliament, and is quite a lot of liberty and freedom. But in 1939, we have -- we found out one day that we are under the Russian -- the Russian -- the Russians have absorbed the three Baltic states and we have heard that -- I mean, like, a day or two days ahead of time that the Russian tanks are going to be coming into Kovno, to Lithuania. Of course, there was no resistance because compared to Russia, we had a small miniature army and there was no way that we were able to fight Russia at that time. And the Russians took -- I remember when they marched into Lithuania. And right away when they marched in -- you see, our gymnasium was a Hebrew gymnasium -- so when the Russians came in, they changed their -- right away they eliminate -- Q: I'm sorry. This airplane --
A: We didn't give them permission.
Q: How did -- in Slovakia especially, was a very important center of Jewish life, and I would like to --
A: The bigger --
Q: Right.
A: Yeah, but can I continue? And then -- Q: Sure.
A: All right. So the Russians came and when they came in, they changed the whole system.
Suddenly from a democracy we became part of the Soviet Union, a republic. And right away they started changing the currency. They brought in many military personnel. They start taking over and nationalize the businesses. They -- in my -- in , my parents were told the house was too big, too luxury for a family, that we have to take in some families.
And they put in some families in the house. Our business -- we had a factory of roofing paper, which was not too big so they didn't -- they didn't do anything about it. But in Kaunus -- in Kovno, they started nationalizing the big businesses and they start taking out those people who they felt they are not sympathic with the Russian government and they had some kind of history that they were exploiting people. They start taking them out -- taking them to Russia. I remember being still in school, I was given an assignment to nationalize a large wholesale food business with all kinds of items there. We had to take the inventory and then, of course, the owners were replaced temporarily to be the managers and then they were kicked out basically from those businesses. And so in they also start taking out those people who they considered that they are bourgeois and fortunately my parents had very good contacts within the Lithuanian community, so could speak perfect Lithuanian, so they didn't touch him. But some of her relatives, they took them out and they send them to Russia. And those people had very difficult time but they have -- they were fortunate in a certain way. And I'm going later to relate to you, that they were fortunate they were taken to Russia rather than stay. So going back to Kaunas, we had -- Kaunas was a, as I mentioned, not a large city but we had some suburbs. One of them was Slovakia, which was called in Lithuanian. And this was a center of Jewish learning. And there were -- people used to come -- students used to come from all over -- all over the world to be educated in those , which were in Slovakia. Slovakia is like a something -- a special place of learning, which many, many big scholars have come out from -- from this . We had another in -- in , but Slovakia was the -- like the crown of the -- of the learning institutions. And most of the people, it was a most of Slovakia was comprised of Jewish population, middle lower class. But people were comfortable. There was not -- nobody was hungry, especially, as I mentioned that Lithuania was an agricultural country. So there was never a shortage of meat and bread and some other products like butter and milk. So Slovakia was very much considered as a very, very unique and very special place, not only in Lithuania, like I mentioned, but throughout the -- throughout the western hemisphere.
Q: Did you spend time in Slovakia as well?
A: I spend very little time because I was more to -- our gymnasium was not a -- not an extreme religious organization. We spoke Hebrew, we observed the holidays, but we were not fanatics like I mentioned.
Q: I have to ask you to try not to say "as I mentioned," because if this gets edited, we won't know what the other part --
A: I understand.
Q: Thank you.
A: Okay, all right. So we start living under the -- under the -- regime of -- see I finally became from a country, communist. Communistic system, socialistic system, they called that. And it was, in the beginning, we felt -- we didn't feel too good about it but then we got used to it. Because especially at the age of 16 -- 15, 16, 17, truthfully, we have not -- we were still not -- had the burden of carrying on a family and making a living and we were just sitting there and watching the changes which happened very, very fast. We saw also many fortifications have become -- have been taken over by the -- of course, the Russians have displayed their force. We had an airport which was about seven or eight miles from our city. And of course, we didn't have a military -- military planes. I think we had one or two of them. That was considered a sizable amount for the -- for the military in Lithuania. So time rolled and we have had -- incidentally, at that time, also in the -- after '39, we had something very special happen to us and this is --
Q: I'm going to have to stop you because we're out of tape and I don't want to interrupt that story.
End of Tape #1
Tape #2
A: I have to mention that -- can I go on? Also being in the Ghetto was very traumatic for the chairman from time to time, they called up Doctor Elkus (ph.) and they said, "We need 100 people for a special assignment." Nobody knew whether this assignment was for real or whether it is to take out and to shoot people, because there were some real assignments. So I remembered Alberson (ph.), which was the place where the -- where the counsel was, and it was a special building assigned -- it was also a place that had also a jail. Because, in the Ghetto, there were sometimes found some people who stole and who did certain acts of -- which was not permitted, you know. So I remembered when the police head and Alberson, the counsel, they had a very difficult task, whom to take out? I mean, the chairman told them we need 100 people. I mean, there were also certain favoritism, which has to -- I mean, happens from time to time. Because if you have a -- if you are a police officer and you have a relative that they want him out, I mean, you would -- you would try to protect him rather than somebody you don't know. So in many cases, it was a very, very difficult job for the -- for the -- for the elderot (ph.), for the -- for the counsel to make. What they opted to do is, most of the time, is people who didn't have families, people who didn't have -- who were not -- who couldn't work for some reason, whom they had some grievances or some problems with them, problematic, you know. Because many people have just collapsed mentally under this pressure, you know, not everybody was able to be withstand that, you know, because it was -- it is like the game of the cat and mouse and it bites off one leg and then the other one. It was a constant game, you know, especially when the Gestapo used to appear and come into the -- into the Ghetto. I mean, it was very traumatic. I have also to mention to you is about -- because it came to my mind about . I had a personal -- after I finished at the airport, I got myself a good brigade. Mine was good because I worked in a -- for some reason they formed a good one and I was at the right time at the right place. They formed a brigade in a marmalade factory -- and this was fantastic, you know -- which held, like -- out brigade was a , who survived incidentally the Ghetto. He later in Italy. And I was very friendly with him and I was able to stick to this brigade. After -- especially after this , this was like a new -- new life. brigade was, we had to -- it was a factory of marmalade and right next to that was also a place where they used to produce sour kraut and sour pickles -- pickled -- pickled, you know, cucumbers. And at least you had -- you were able to -- to get some food, you know, because sour kraut and pickles and marmalade, it's already a meal. And plus the fact marmalade is made with sugar and sugar is very heavy. I remember they used to -- I was compelled -- I was pretty strong, you know. I was compelled to -- to take up bags of 100 kilo sugar -- which is 225 pounds -- to the third floor, where they had the mixing of the marmalade. And sometimes what I used to do is, I used to punch a hole in the bag and I had a -- this -- this coat that you see in this picture. On this one. And my grandmother had made, like, a double -- a double-deck, you know -- a double --
Q: I'm sorry. Can we start that through again and just say, "I had a coat that my grandmother" -- A: I had a coat that my grandmother fixed it up in such a fashion that she made, like, a -- hidden pockets. And when I carried the sugar, I used to punch a hole in the bag and make -- from paper make, like, a little canal and I used to canal the sugar from the bag directly to my -- to my coat, you know. And this was very, very helpful in a certain way to survive because sugar is very nutritious. And in one case, there were -- we had a German civilian who was very much connected to the Gestapo -- besides that, what I used to do also, I used to steal marmalade. But the only way to steal that was in -- in -- we had, like -- like, they have now -- you know, the metal coca-cola containers -- using a container. And many times I burned my -- my stomach because I used to steal it and I used to insert it right here and then with a coat, I used to close it up. And I used to pull it out from the -- from the -- I was not able to have accessibility to this when it was already placed in a cool place, so I had to take that when it was hot. And this was -- it was sometimes terrible. Not withstanding that, I felt the pain of the -- of the burning was worth it in order to accomplish the -- accomplish the aim -- you know, the goal.
Q: I want to ask you a question. When Ray (ph.) talked to you the other day, she mentioned that you said something about carrying sugar up for the Gestapo.
A: Yes. That was in my school, when I went to the gymnasium. I had -- I was sent -- twice, I was sent there for special work, also carrying 225 pounds of -- also to the top floor. They converted our school into -- they made it into a storage place. And when had to -- we had to do that and that was before that.
Q: Okay. Would you tell me about that though? A: About --
Q: What did you do, because I'm --
A: What I did is, we had to carry these bags of -- they used to take us to the truck down to the main entrance, and we used to have to -- to -- about five or six of us, go out to the top floor where they had the sugar, and they had the purpose to place that in a high level so it should not be stolen or something. So they -- we used to carry them to -- to the certain places for -- for stirring purposes. And -- but that's not related to the marmalade factory, which it was a separate --
Q: Okay. But while we're on that, who was up there?
A: There was a -- there was a military storage for the -- for the German -- for the German army.
And it was not precisely Gestapo, it was a military. Gestapo is -- I was threatened by this myre (ph.), and I was in the factory. One day he caught me with this -- with this marmalade, and he just waved his finger and says, "Next time you're going to go to the Gestapo if I catch you." It was -- was something like that. So he was very generous at that time. He just kicked me and that's all, and took away the --
Q: When -- when you went up to take the sugar to the -- this military storage place, did you hear people talking, did you see anything that was particularly interesting?
A: Not -- we were too busy in carrying and being able to carry the load. That was -- that was -- actually, my mind was blanked out at that time. We were not able even to communicate because they -- they used to -- when it came to a job like this, it's not like the airport where you had a shovel and a pick and you had to dig and this. You know, this -- this was they had to be unloaded in a certain time and they -- and you had to -- you had to rush. And if you didn't rush they just clubbed you. So at this -- this moment, you were just trying to -- to keep up with your strength, in order to be able to fulfill the -- fulfill the job. There was also, in cases before I became -- I start working, not withstanding if we worked at this brigade, from time to time, they take us to some other places. And I have to tell you something which is -- which was very much inscribed in my memory. It's that while in 1941, beginning '42, they brought to Lithuanian, echelons (ph.) -- train loads with the boxcars of people from Austria and from Czechoslovakia and from some other places. And amazingly --
Q: I've got to stop you. I hate to -- actually, I need that you to start that whole thing.
A: There was a very remarkable something that I have to bring it up because there are certain aspects of being in the camps that -- that I have to highlight. And one of them is that this incredible experience that I had. And namely, they start bringing, to the railroad station, echelons -- boxcars with the Jews from Austria and Germany. They called that, we found out later, the . It basically means "place from one" -- "take them from one place and put them into another place," in German. And this train came with cars loaded with pianos, with furniture, with all kinds of luxury items, to make believe to those people -- because you see, when they took out from Germany or from Austria, Jews to send them to their -- to their massacre -- I mean, to their graves, to their killings, was -- apparently, they had a certain -- a certain -- they had to handle it in a certain way. They tried to convince them that they are being taken to another place, just only they have to take them to other places. So when they came -- and at that time, I was working for the Gestapo brigade. There was a special brigade which was the Gestapo brigade and many people have tried very hard to work in this brigade because this brigade was always connected with certain -- certain things that had to do with food. And there was many possibilities to -- to fill up your stomach, you know, to be -- not to be hungry. And this time they needed additional -- additional people. So apparently, they took me and they took a group of other people to that task. And I saw the way this echelons came, and I saw that they came in -- in, like, in plush trains. It was not -- some -- some boxcars came also at the same time, but they came for a -- for a purpose of baggage and some other things. But these trains came with the people with their jewelry, with everything, and you could see very highly standard people who came. And I knew exactly what they are doing with them -- what they are going to do with them. Before came over to us, he pulled out his pistol and we were, like, six trucks, six guys, and he said to us -- he said, "You see, I forbid you to communicate and to talk to these people. There is no way that you can exchange some words, absolutely nothing. If I see your lips moving, I know that you're trying to tell them something or give -- send them a message, so there is going to be nothing else than a bullet through your head." And he just, like, took his pistol and just scraped our faces, you know, to impress upon us that he means business. The difficulty was my knowing what's going to happen to those people. Who do we tell them or whether to tell them was the right thing or not to tell them. It was so difficult. Now, our task was to take out from the windows, a German would say to one of the cars -- plush cars and say, " . It means, "Give me your packs. You have a few kilometers. You have to walk a few kilometers, please give us your packages because it's going to be very burdensome and we are placing these packages in the trucks and we are going to deliver them. And make sure to describe your names on the packages so we are going to know how to return them to you." I knew that that's fallacy. I mean, where they are taking them is to the 9th Fort and it's about ten for 12 miles walking. It's not a couple of kilometers. And that's what's going to happen to them. And in one case, I saw a lady, which I -- pretty young lady, and I really felt -- was a husband, it was a couple apparently -- and if I felt very bad and I tried to explain to them, to tell them that -- of course, we were already involved in taking the packages. I looked around, I didn't see , apparently he went to have something to drink or something. And I said to them, "They are taking you to your death. Try -- when you march, try to escape or try to do something or something." You know, the people didn't believe me. They just didn't trust me. They trusted the Germans but they just didn't trust me. They looked at me, looked at me, and they looked at me like I'm trying to -- and then I felt very bad about the fact -- I mean, I felt scared that they should not -- they should not give me -- and they should not give me -- turn me over or say that I tried to tell them. This was -- this was the authoritism. The German -- the German Jews were very . They felt that they were first Germans and then Jews. That was their big -- their big problem. They were -- they eliminated, from their prayer books, Jerusalem -- it would say, "Next year in Jerusalem." They used to put in, "Next year in Berlin." This incident I remember so vividly. And I remember when they took the packages, and we took them directly to the Gestapo. And the Gestapo, they had a big -- a big warehouse where they just threw them in one big pile and then they used to have a -- those people who worked at the Gestapo used to sort them out and place -- for instance, place different items based on a list that they had, which items have to go here and there. And they were very meticulous and very organized. The Germans, they were extremely organized. I mean, when it came to organization it was -- I mean, they were leaders in the world on that.
Q: Was this in --
A: This was --
Q: -- ?
A: This was -- I'm not sure, but I think it was in the beginning of '42 or the middle of '42 or something, it happened into that time. And I know for a fact that they were taken to the 9th Fort and they were -- and they were massacred there.
Q: Do you know how many?
A: There were many -- there were thousands, at least based on what found out later of 5,000 or 6,000. The have inscriptions in the main fort where they held them overnight. Many inscribed their names on the walls. Certain inscriptions thinking that somebody is going to find them and find out.
Q: You know that there was a huge transport from I don't know where in Europe in November of '41, where they brought 5,000 people in and --
A: Maybe that was -- that was -- I -- I truthfully -- I -- I just cannot synchronize my mind with the dates because to me, it was a -- you see, to me and I think to everybody, a minute was a day and a second was an hour and a day was a year, you know. It was torturous just beyond comprehension. And then, of course, we found out 1941, that in the small cities they took out everybody. And they didn't put them in camps or Ghetto or anything, but they took them out and in certain secluded spaces and they made them dig graves and then they shot them there. There was mostly Lithuanians . It was under supervision of the Germans. I have a book here which describes city by city when it happened and how it happened. And my father was one of the eldest in the -- in , him and the other one. And he was offered to -- they offered him that he was to give him some harbor -- shelter, you know, harbor him, himself. But he said, "It has to be the whole family." They said, "The family cannot be ." So he said, "No way. Wherever the family goes, I will go." And of course, afterwards, it was two years ago I was in Lithuania, very secluded small place, a few kilometers from the city where they took there -- there were like 2,750 people, children and which they have massacred there. They kept them for a short time. We had a -- in our city we had a little lake, and there was a count that had his palace there, still from . So in this place, they may have -- he had some stables for horses. Right there they made certain accommodations and they kept people there for a few days and then they took them out with this and he was . And you had to go through a narrow path and there was, like, a wooded area and they took them there and there is a -- they have a monument there and they -- and they shot all of them there.
Q: Did you have much information in terms of what was happening in other towns when you were --
A: Very little information. We were kept aware way from newspapers. But, of course, when we went outside to work in the brigades, we had sometimes opportunities to exchange views with some Lithuanians. I had also a case where I had my cousin , where we worked together. One day they took us to , that was a -- "NSKK" it's called in German -- which they -- that was a special unit. They took us to cut -- it was winter. It was snowing. It was Christmas -- before Christmas. And they took us to a place and we had to cut some wood. And it was cold and the guard -- lady was a Lithuanian lady. She felt guilty, you know. She was an opera singer. She invited us to come in to warm up and she gave us a little soup and some other things. And then she -- remind that to my cousin -- she kind of blessed us and she told us that she hopes that we are going to live through this dark chapter and survive. And the guard, this was -- this also was a -- this was still before it became a concentration camp, and he was also from the . He was a very nice guy and he was also sharing. At least we were cutting wood and we had -- the blood was flowing through our veins and we were a little warm but he had -- all the time he just patted himself. That was a very -- there are some moments, you know, that you remember vividly. I remember exactly the house where -- in my back mind -- the way we were cutting the wood and the way she invited us to the house and she had tears in her eyes. And she said -- she was very human, you know, very much against what was going on. She talked to us in Lithuanian, the guard didn't understanding any of it. So she was very open. And right away she gave us tea and some soup and some piece of bread. Incidentally, Lithuanian food was very good bread, the butter. Lithuania used to export to England. All kinds of farm products to England in large numbers. Of course, when the Russians came they took out everything. I mean, they devastated the country. They eliminate many, many -- we had cows in the thousands.
Q: Back to the Ghetto -- A: Pardon?
Q: Back to the Ghetto -- A: Yeah, back --
Q: Did everybody in the Ghetto go out on these work brigades?
A: There were some -- some factories within the Ghetto. They were mostly for youngsters and for people who learned a trade. I had, for instance, a teacher of mathematics by the name of Faulkman (ph.). He was a brilliant, brilliant guy. He became a shoe maker in the Ghetto. And you know, if you had a trade you had more possibilities to survive and to -- especially, you know, there were many Germans that used to come in and say, "Look, my boots are -- fix them" -- and this and that -- or "I need to buttons there. I need certain things to be fixed." And tradespeople were able to -- to fulfill their requirement. Now, there were -- basically the Ghetto was , that's the way they were called. The Ghetto factories were -- basically what they did is they used to manufacturer there many items for the army, like, all kinds of uniforms -- everything from uniforms, from hats, from underwear, from boots. And we had shoe makers and we had tailors and we had -- we had all kinds of tradespeople who were there. We had also something very interesting, which is going to surprise you. I'm going to tell you. We had a symphony orchestra within the Ghetto. We had people who were very talented, extremely talented. They were performing sometimes with the permission of the -- of the guards and we had to announce that we have a concert there. There were people -- writers who wrote and, of course, actors. I could mention to you now, we didn't have a hospital, so we made a provisional place where we used to take care of sick people. But the word was, "Don't get sick if you want to survive." And that was, "Don't get sick if you want to survive." So how could you prevent that. Sometimes, you know, with the snow and the bad weather and the colds. But the instinct, you know, the force of wanting to survive was sometimes so -- so strong, you know, that is stronger than any bacteria or anything. You can overcome something. And this is without food. And I myself, when I used to work in Sativa (ph.) --
A: We have to change the tape. End of Tape #2
Tape #3
Q: Okay. We were talking about the children being --
A: Where in the Ghetto, at the children section, it was specially devised to get out all of the children from the Ghetto. And in order to impliment that, they had also to take out all the police because this was also -- there were also children from the police officers and you know how a father would react seeing his child being dragged and beaten and taken to a bus and then taken away. So after this -- this happened -- and this was very fast, they had a big number of of SS people who implimented this function. They went from house to house and they knew exactly which house had children. They had already a list.
Apparently, previously they have asked for the -- for the composition of the people who lived in each -- in each house. You know, it was -- so they had certain records or somebody gave them the records. And they discriminately -- I mean, they have -- they have walked into each house, pulled out of the children. And most of the children were -- especially the oldest ones -- were -- their mothers were at work at this time. There were only a number of mothers, who when they took the children, they want to go with their kids. They wouldn't let them stay with the kids so they beat them up and they just kicked them and then they took away the children. And the mothers were devastated. So especially now at six, seven o'clock, when the people started returning from work, and when they found out this news, it was such an out cry. It was such a tremendous outcry that everybody was crying and everybody was devastated. It was something that some people threw themselves on the barbed wire, you know, to see whether they just can just get out and do something. And people -- really, the mothers didn't care -- care for their lives anymore. They just wanted to join them, to be together with their children. And the police officers -- the way we found out later -- they were investigated to find out whether there were some kids that were hidden, like we were -- we hid my cousin, who was really about, at that time, about three years, three and a half years, maybe four years. And besides that, they want also to know where -- because they had information at that time -- it was already '44 and they knew that there were many, many, many freedom fighters who still have communication with the Ghetto. And they had -- apparently it was felt that also that the police -- certain police officers had helped some and still helping some of the -- of the freedom fighters. So they wanted to find out and they shot quite a number of police officers. They shot this Greenberg (ph.) who was very instrumental.
They tortured him and shot him and he would not divulge and would not give out where the -- where the hiding places were. And then the rest of those police officers, they -- part of them -- they returned back to the Ghetto and became devastated and found also their children gone. And it was really -- the -- the feeling, I mean, it was -- it was so bad, you know, that the whole situation created an incredible loss of hope, you know, when you saw something like this. And this was March and it was already when the Russians have advanced already, substantially towards -- towards the -- towards the west -- towards the -- they liberated already many, many cities in Russia and they were moving towards Lithuania. And that was an episode which is -- which was very, very tragic, you know, very even difficult to describe this. This is -- sometimes we are talking between ourselves, some survivors, and we exchange -- exchange views. And the question is, between one survivor and the other one is, how to make people understand what we went through. I mean, this is -- I mean, it's -- you see, you are limited in being able to understand it when somebody tells you something, you know, because there -- our minds are in a certain way limited. We cannot understand beyond this limit, you know. And it is, how can somebody describe certain things that like? How can somebody describe that a German SS man takes a child of a year old, takes him by his legs and smashes him with his head against -- against a wall? I mean, how can -- this is -- it's -- it's not even the more substandard countries. I mean, it's happening, you know. They kill people, they massacre people, but I don't think it's only -- I mean, and it's hard to describe and it's hard to believe. Sometimes I myself, it's hard for me to believe that -- it looks to me like a bad nightmare. But I mean that, it truly happened, you know. And time was going so slow, you know. The worst part is that although you worked so hard and you did all kinds of -- I didn't mention some other work that I used to do. They took us to the -- to the army barracks sometimes and I had to clean up the latrines and something else. And sometimes they took some people and they just threw them into the latrines just to have a little pastime for themselves, you know. So I mean, it's beyond -- beyond description. Now, that's one of the reasons when we met together with survivors sometimes and we share experiences, we -- we can understand it much better than explaining that to the outer world. And it's very hard to believe that a country so advanced, you know, was get -- getting and and all this. That were able that -- came down to a level, to such a level to be so destructive and so without hearts, without -- so Ghetto was -- this was a -- at that stage it was already a camp, yeah. Now, next move was that we decided that we cannot keep -- my uncle decided that he cannot keep anymore his daughter there. So we made contact to a -- there was a rabbi's wife, Sherman (ph.) was her name. And I'm sure that she is going to surfacing in some of your -- in some other places. She was an incredible lady. She was a rabbi's wife. Her husband was in Israel -- in Palestine already. And she -- some way he left before that.
And she was matchmaking. She was out -- without -- without . She was going around and finding places to harbor children. So somebody told us about her and we contacted her and she found a place for Sarami (ph.), which was my -- my -- my cousin. She was three and a half, four years old at that time. My aunt laughs always, she says that I used to have an incredible appetite, you know. And I used to watch, you know -- she used to give her -- sometimes we were able to smuggle in tapioca. You know what it is? It's a -- and I used to sit quietly and watch that and pray that she should not eat the tapioca so it would be left over for me to eat. So she always -- so we decided to -- how we would do it. At that time, we had two SS people in the Ghetto. One's name was Fifeger (ph.) and the other name was -- what was the other name? It will come to me pretty soon. Yeah, it's was Fifeger was a former teacher and he was very much befriended my uncle. He was very nice. He was the SS. And he told the story that he was forced into the SS. And he expressed very good sentiments. So my uncle had to put his confidence -- he showed -- in few cases, he showed that he was helpful. And we could see that he is not one of -- one of these beasts, you know. So my uncle explained to him and he knew that we're having the child there against all odds, and he promised my uncle that he is going to help him out. This was a remarkable -- but his comrade -- his friend, who's name I forgot, was just the opposite. Just the opposite. What he did once was also beyond -- he encouraged people -- he opened up -- he opened up this -- first, let me finish with Fifeger. So they arranged that the bread was coming in twice a week with these big platforms, and then horses with a driver were going out. So we arranged to -- I gave her a sleeping pill. We put her in the bag because they -- it used to come in bags. So we put her in one of the bags. And we put her under a so that she can go through the -- through the gates. Because at the gates, they always used to stick something to find where there's sometimes hide -- but it was already prearranged, you know, that apparently he did that -- Fifeger did that, you know. And we were able to get her out and she was given away to a very nice Lithuanian family. They took care -- they even baptized her and made her, like, a part of the -- and she spoke only Lithuanian and she was -- she fortunately survived. In exchange, my uncle -- the police officer who was shot, his little boy was also given out to somebody. But he was betrayed and they killed him. Apparently, this Lithuanian that took him was given certain things in order to do that. They betrayed him and he was -- we found out later that he was -- he was killed.
Q: Do you want to take a break now?
A: Let me just finish with -- it will come back to me, the name of the other guy. He was a bad, bad -- I should have written it down. So he formed -- it was already March, April -- it was already -- the Ghetto already knew that it's -- it's -- it's still a little bit of hope on the horizon. So he let out the word that he is going to -- that he is going to let out some people to escape. And he opened up a hole that was in the fence. And needless to say, he was with a machine gun there and he killed like 14 people there, claiming that they tried to escape. So that was SS .
Q: Another thing I think I asked you before -- why don't we -- A: You want I should tell also about the escape or --
Q: Yeah, yeah. Tell me a little bit about the Ghetto becoming an official concentration camp.
A: Well, it was the end of the 1943, we saw certain movements in the different directions. We felt that there is some kind of changes going to be implemented in the Ghetto. And we really didn't know exactly. We felt that the guards were changed. We have seen more -- that was also a time when we had seen more Hungarians. They brought in Hungarians, and especially some truck drivers. One of them, which I knew pretty well, he had a bad mouth, but he was not so bad. But the rest were very bad. He was , he was a Hungarian truck driver who worked very close with -- with and Fifeger. He was, like, always with them. And we felt that by bringing in this nationalist, and by trying to put in more restrictions, and start -- they started also watching more of the -- all the movements and what's going on and what's happening in the Ghetto. And they were very much concerned and very much were looking for -- for some kind of supplies that the Ghetto would supply or the Ghetto would produce or the Ghetto would have some contacts with the -- with the freedom fighters. So in order to have a tighter watch, they have also tried to squeeze out from the police and see whether their police -- to find within the police also some people who would -- who would be on their side. They were not -- were not too much able to -- they had not been able to get from the Jewish police, accept in isolated cases, because the police was well aware of what was happening. And they themselves -- the Ghetto was -- were the counsel in many occasions -- and in many cases have tried to they help. And they knew sometimes the whereabouts of people who would go out to the forest and fight and in different measures and acts of terrorism and blowing up railroads, cutting off supplies, and shooting in many cases, in back of the Germans. Although the Germans themselves, like -- the Germans themselves, they -- they -- most of the time they didn't dare to invade the forest because the forest was for them, taboo. But they used for that purpose, they used Lithuanians, in many cases, to find out and find out the right spots and then they would be able to -- be able to move in. We also saw, not only by the change of the guard and by their behavior, we had felt a bigger presence in the Ghetto of the military. Because normally, in all those years, they were most of the times guarding the Ghetto from the outside and they were hardly -- not too frequently, they used to come in and look for themselves, look in at certain aspects of the Ghetto. Now, in the late '43, we have -- we had a much bigger presence. There were also a repetition of people that -- of requirements for labor force in some other places within Lithuania and outside of Lithuania, whereby they used to come and, of course, make a selection or they used to appeal to the counsel in order to provide them with those elements who can be useful for them. And most of the times, they -- some of the times they also tried to get some people who had some skills, and tried to use them to the best of their -- their ability. We have seen also that factories, in the very sudden, have been over swamped with additional work. As the front was getting closer, there were more requirements and more necessities to -- for -- for the Germans, for their supplies. They needed the help and the cooperation of this . So they used to work overtime. I mean, instead ten or 12 hours, they used to work 14, 15 hours. And they also implemented some shifts in that time.
The underground movement grew faster and faster. They had now much better opportunities because the Lithuanians by themselves also were not dumb. They saw that the tide was changing. So they, in many cases, they tried to befriend and be a little bit more helpful.
Although, the same orders still persisted that if they catch somebody that they would have a . But we have seen that they were more aggressive in hiding people and in helping and -- in trying to make up for the damages that they have done before. When the -- in 1944, after the -- after children and after we have -- we have brought out our -- my cousin from the Ghetto, I myself started thinking in terms of getting away. I was in contact in two cases, in both --
Q: I would ask you to say that again because of the airplane. What are you going to tell me about now? Are you going to tell me about your escape?
A: Yes. The guards, they are more frequently coming into the Ghetto. I didn't see, really a -- I mean, they were as brutal as they used to be because this -- especially foreigners -- the Hungarians, they were not good people especially. They were they were as brutal as there are, maybe some more than the others on many, many occasions. This truck driver, he was -- I mentioned about letting the people -- and telling them they can escape and so forth and so on, because people have started feeling that the air has changed that the front was getting closer and closer. And the question was when and how fast. At the same time, they started getting preparations for -- for -- to liquidate the Ghetto. Apparently this was mentioned in few occasions that -- that pretty soon they have already orders in place in order to eliminate the Ghetto, and to -- and to take out all those remains of the people. At that time, I think -- I'm sure that in the Ghetto there were not left over more than 4 or 5,000 people maybe, from 33,000 originally. So what they did is -- also, when they used to -- when the Ghetto became smaller -- smaller in population -- they also start cutting off smaller territories. What it is, where we had the where the gate was -- the gate for the supplies -- there was a number of houses that one day they came in and they took a bunch of people, workers, and they didn't remove the fence. It was the original fence. What they did is, they put in another fence, cutting off, like, four or five blocks from the original one. So it became like a Ghetto was in a Ghetto, you know. This was, in a certain way, to my personal advantage, you know, because -- and maybe some others, which I don't know. I can speak for myself on it. What they did is, actually by putting a new fence and putting guards -- putting guards around this fence, they have diminished the guards from the overall fence, which was before, even without taking off. What happened was, when we used to go to work, we decided -- five people decided to flee the camp. We saw already that the time is running out. I spoke three times to one friend of mine that was in the -- was in the partisans. And he told me that whenever I want to join them I should contact somebody in order to join them. The only thing is, after that I tried to get the contact man and he was already gone. So I went to where my uncle was and I told him, "Look, I think that it's no reason for me to remain here. I mean we're close. We're very close to the end. I mean, they are going -- one of these days, we are going to get up and we're going to find ourselves surrounded by trucks and they are just going to take us -- take us out and take us to camps or take us somewhere else or take us to the 9th Fort." So my uncle, who was very conservative always -- and he really was very close to me, like a father to me. And this was maybe one of reasons that I did not leave the place sooner. And especially my grandmother, she was crazy about me, you know. she has saved her, she would not -- and we knew that she also survived, you know, the children . That I also remember because she was with a child because now we couldn't get her out because it would be too difficult, you know, a child is something else. So my uncle came to the conclusion that's fine and gave me his blessing.
And I deciding to -- now, how are we going to do it? So I devised a plan, in other words, the houses which were behind the first -- general fence, a few houses still left. They have -- Normally, in many cases they would explode some of the houses. They would put in some dynamite and explode it. Here, they did it later on with the rest of the Ghetto. So I had a -- I had three more people with me -- three -- four. There was one guy that was himself from Poland and for some reason he was stuck in and never was able to get out. I think it was the nephew of -- the nephew of my aunt, who is now in Charlotte, North Carolina. And then the other one was a guy that used to frequently come to our house. And then it was the other fellow that was -- also was a nephew of somebody who worked with my uncle. So this guy knew -- supposedly he knew the road, how to -- I mean, where to go in order to get to the forest.
Q: You know what --
A: The forest was --
Q: -- I have to stop you, sir. The reason is, I think that people --
A: Okay. I'll make that short, you know. Okay. We were five, we have accumulated some supplies in one of the houses. And one day when we came back from work, we have -- we just defected from the -- from the group, which was large from when we came back from work. And we went into this house and then we watched the out guard -- the outside guarded had also special plans to cut -- to cut a wire. We have -- wait until the night. On that third day, we cut -- in our supplies what we had was water, sugar, and bread. We watched -- we timed the guards as far as walking, we cut through the wires, and we just came out. And we -- it was nighttime and we were not able to go too far because nighttime, it was -- it was very dangerous to go because you're able -- they would stop you and right away you would be finished. So we hid next to a house in the garden, there was dense bushes and we stayed there for the night. And then early morning, we left and we went towards the woods -- towards the woods which was . There was a place were there were already some partisans were working -- were working in exploding some supplies -- some supplies for the Germans and so on. Okay. We had to go through to a main highway. And when we walked, we walked like in one behind the other one. So when we reached the highway -- and this was during the daytime already, a guy with a -- with a bicycle and was dressed in civilian but with a rifle was waiting for us. And when we approached him, I mean, he took off the rifle and he said, "Your documents." Okay. We start running in different directions. This was outside the city, you know, it was a big field of potatoes and corn.
End of Tape #3
Tape #4
A: Details, I have no knowledge of the details. Q: Okay.
Q: I know certain -- certain -- was in the camp, you know, but there is nothing that I was able personally to -- personally to verify. So -- okay. So we start and this guy took off his rifle and started shooting one of the five. I mean, he hid and then I found out later that they killed them. Four of us, we dispersed and I ran in one direction to the cornfield. And I saw some -- it was really late during the day and I --
Q: You know something? I hate to ask you to do this, but actually I'm concerned because this is on two tapes.
A: Towards the beginning of '44, we have seen with a change, also, the status of the -- from the Ghetto to a concentration camp. We felt a new arrangements and some things -- certain things -- certain changes which we -- it was not too hard for us to figure out. We saw the handwriting on the wall. We saw that everything that's happening with the Russian army, the victorious expelling, pushing the Germans towards -- towards the west. And we felt also that there is time for me and for some friends to get out and get out as soon as possible because every day was a matter that -- we knew exactly what our fate was going to be. So truthfully, we didn't have too much to risk because one way or the other way, we would not be able to survive. So I went to see any uncle and I told him that -- and my grandmother, I told them that I'm ready with my other fellow -- fellow friends to get out and to get out fast. So my uncle also gave me -- he had, like, a little golden coin and he gave this me and he said in case of necessity or something . He had, like, three of them so he was hiding them always in somewhere. So when -- soon I got together with my friends and when we went to work, coming back we just evaded the guards and we came -- came into one of the houses that we marked for our shelter in between, in order to be able to -- to plan our escape. One of my friends was much younger than us, a couple of years, and he was a short one, and we used him as the outlook. So he used to look in to watch. And he was the one that timed the steps of the guard on the outside of the fence and then came to the conclusion. He gave us the signal, we came out, we cut through the wires and it was nighttime. And we just slipped out, all of us. Because really the security was behind us in the smaller Ghetto where there was double-rolled barbed wire. This was an old fence which they had never tried to repair because the Ghetto was in the Ghetto, you know. Now, when we had to -- we slept over there in a -- in a garden, a dense garden. And in the morning we start going. But we left a distance between ourselves. Rather than walking in a group, we walked, like, one by one, some meters, one behind the other one. When we came to a place where we had to cross a highway there was one person with a bicycle and a rifle on his shoulder, a Lithuanian. And suddenly he came out and approached us, "Stop. Documents. Raise your hands." So when he did that, we start running in different directions. It was only one person and we knew that he might shoot one but he cannot shoot everybody. Besides that, his aim was not too good because I felt -- when I run, I felt, like, a couple bullets passing me and then I don't know. I really ran like never in my life. And then I threw myself in the cornfield. I know also that later on when I was laying there for quite a while, I know that they had some people with horses try to locate somebody and I hoped that they are not going to find anybody, but during nighttime I walked about additional half a mile and I saw the flickering lights. And I say to myself, "Would that with quarters for the chairman or some barracks or something?" Then I stepped away and I found myself close to a small, small woods. And there I slept over the night. It was a little bit cold nighttime, but I covered myself with leaves and some other things. And there was a little -- a little -- I wouldn't say a river, but it was little place with water. And then I was hiding behind the bushes. In the morning, I heard some voices in Russian and I watched and I saw that there a woman came and she -- apparently two friends. But one stayed with a -- with a metal thing, you know, what they put here -- put in cloth.
And she started washing right around this where there was -- it was not even like a river. But it was a place that I remember I drunk water. I had my hat. So with my hat I used to take and drink the water because food was nothing. I used to collect some berries, you know, some wild berries, and this was my food. So I was desperate. I was very hungry and this woman was washing and I said myself, "Let me -- let me approach her." And I spoke perfect Russian, of course. So I came out. I said, "Look, I'm an escapee. You should help me with some food." So I was not sure whether she was going to go -- first of all, I didn't know. I asked her what was there in this place where I saw the flickering lights in the night. And she said, "No, that's a camp, a civilian camp for civilian Russians. An intern camp for civilian Russians." But then she told me that she is going to come back and bring me some food. And I thought to myself, I prayed, I said, "She is going to bring me food or she is going to bring me a German who is going to kill me." About 15 minutes later she comes back with a bottle of milk and a piece of spec (ph.) -- you know, that's from -- it's meat, fat meat, you know -- and a piece of bread. And then I started talking to her and she said to me that she got scared when she saw me because I looked like I'm an old . And I explained to her that I'm a refugee so far. And so she said to me, "Look, we have in our camp two Russian prisoners who fled and who are hiding in out -- in this camp. And they also are going to -- they are planning to go to join the freedom fighters, the partisans. And where they are going? They are going to ." , -- there used to be the forest of , which was not too far away from there. And this guy that was with me, he was leading us. And he told us and he explained to me because he was himself from , and he told us, he gave me a certain set perimeters, but now I mean, he was gone, so I had to do them myself. So then in the evening, the two Russians came over. They had knives for themselves and they asked me a few questions and they wanted to verify that I'm legitimate, I shouldn't be some betrayer. And then the next morning -- early in the morning, we're going to the woods, we approached them and one of them had apparently a contact or he knew exactly a certain spot. First of all, the Russian prisoners were not treated very friendly by the Russians because Stalin's -- Stalin's view was that a Russian should never fell into a prisoner's life, he should give his life for the country. But of course, that was not the case. So he took us to the forest at one point and he -- then we met about three or four more guys there. They were from the -- apparently they were former Russian prisoners. And they had already a plan, a topographic plan, and they had all rolls.
They said that they had received some supplies from parachutes that they -- and they had some assignment to watch and to see whether some German forces are going -- if they are going to be close by, they have to communicate and they have to try to do certain sabotage -- sabotage work. We spent about, I would say, maybe about close to 20 days moving around from one spot to the other one because we didn't want to stay in one spot. On few occasions -- I was not trained, I didn't know anything about ammunition or anything. They have done, basically, the work. In different cases, I was the look out. They used me to be the look out. They had some light arms and knives basically, and they had some back packs with ammunition. We spent about, I would say about four weeks. And one day, we heard the movement. We put our ears -- normally, what we used to do is, we used to put our ears to the ground so we can detect -- that's a way of detecting whether there is some heavy movement and here we detected some -- based on our imaginations -- some tanks. And now we saw about three or four German tanks rolling not too far away, you know. And then about a couple hours later, we heard some shootings and an exchange of fire. And this whole neighborhood vicinity became like a -- like a military -- I mean, hell. Because bullets were flying out at the shrubs -- so burning -- burning bushes and all this. It was an incredible, incredible exchange of fire. Then, it lasted for about an hour, an hour and a half and it looked to me that it lasted forever, you know. Because we found ourselves in the middle and we said to ourselves, "Now we are going to be killed by friendly -- by friendly -- our friendly power -- gun fire." Suddenly, it whitened out. It was quiet like nothing -- like nothing ever -- anything ever happened, you know. And I say to one of Russians, "What would that be? It's too quiet." We got used already to the -- to the incredible sound of explosions, you know.
And then suddenly we heard again -- the Russian put his -- he put his ear on the ground. He said, "Something is happening. It's quite apparent but something is happening." And, like, 45 minutes later we heard some movement of, like, troops. Not too many. And then we saw the first Russians approaching us. And the first question was -- the first question was, "Have you seen some tanks?" "Yeah, we saw quite a few hours ago." And he said, "No, these tanks already . Have you seen some other tanks?" I said, "No." Right away it was -- I amazed, you know, because right away I was approached by one of the lieutenants. I think he was a captain, not lieutenants -- captain, because he had three stars. It was a captain. He had actually told me that -- he looked at me and looked at me and says, "Are you Jewish?" I said, "Yes." "So am I," he says. Okay. We embraced each other and he -- right away what he did is, he told us -- he said, "Look, this is the front line and the line might change because we don't know what -- what is going to happen a few kilometers from here. My advisors, and what I want to see you is towards the back." You know, towards the back . And right away, he called a soldier and he said, "Take these guys and take them over." And in the meantime, we was already approaching some jeeps and some -- some -- some other military units. And he told us to move as far as possible towards the back. He said, "You went through already, it's sufficient." I mean, it's -- and this was the -- this was actually the way that we -- so happy. I mean, the first time we felt, like, liberated, you know. And then he asked me -- another guy that he referred me to asked me some question. He said me whether I want to join the army or what I want to do. I said, "No, no, first what I want to do is, I want to go -- I want to see" -- because my question was, how soon are they going to liberate Kaunas? He said, "That might take still a few days or it still might take some time." So we where with the army for about -- I think about ten or 15 days until they have to Kaunas and to liberated it. I went right away to the Ghetto. The Ghetto was exploded. Everything, all the houses were exploded. So people came out from the hiding in some places, some people came out from hiding. I went to this place where we were hiding and we had some photographs and I found some photographs. But supplies and other things that we had in our -- in our house in the ground was nothing. It was, like, everything burned. Right away I went to Kaunas. This was . I went to Kaunas, I got myself -- right away I met with this officer and he told me that he is going to -- he is -- I mean, that he is going to be coming into Kaunas and he gave me a number where I can reach him. And he told me that if I have some -- some kind of desire of something. I said, "Yeah, I would like to have -- I have some -- I have some relatives here, and I would like to see whether I can find them." I'm sure that I felt very optomistic. I said, "Maybe there are some relatives that I have." And I start floundering around for quite a few days. And then I found a family that we were together in the Ghetto and then later they went to Canada. But I used to send them packages when I wasn't there. When -- just a minute -- but I send them packages after, when I want there anymore. They -- I helped them to find a place -- a living place because the city was -- was devastated, you know. There were not too many -- too much fights in the city, but it was many have escaped and left behind themselves apartments with furniture. You know, the same way, like, when the -- when the Germans came in. So right away I found a friend of mine who told me that if I would like to serve -- to serve in the Russian army because, due to the fact that I have finished gymnasium, I speak Lithuanian, German, and Russian, so I would be able to prospect. He told me that there is coming a group of -- a group of people to -- of military men to take some -- to -- they are looking for some interpreters. They need very badly people who speak Lithuanian and Russian.
Basically German is not -- at this point, is not important but it's going to become important later. And at the same time, they promulgated already that all these people from this and this year are going to be -- they are going to be from 1924, 1925, 1926, they are going to be taken into the army -- to the regular army. And I say to myself, "I would rather serve in a specialty unit than to wait and then we recruited for the army." They had a place to this -- this is a military place, whereby they check out new -- they check out perspective soldiers, you know, healthwise and whether they have TB because there were many with TB, you know, from those that survived. So I actually signed up for this -- for this unit. I remember a younger captain came in and -- and interviewed me and he was satisfied. And then he told me that he is going to recruit me and I will have to go through a short preparation -- military preparation of about six weeks. And I agreed. In the meantime, he told me I can stay there and he gave me an official paper where I can go and find myself an apartment. So I found my relatives, those I mentioned. And I found myself not too far away where I used to live before, on the some , on same main street. I got myself a nice apartment and my relatives were very happy. They had two children and myself and I told them, "Look, I'm going to be just here only temporarily and I'm going to be leaving." And also, it was very interesting walking on the -- when I got myself a bicycle and riding on a bike, I met a very good friend of mine. This , who was the head of the . He wasn't in the Ghetto and he was involved in the partisans. And he escaped -- I mean, he joined in the also in the army but in the civilian department. They made him, like, commissary in the civilian department because he had excellent contacts with some high-ranking people. So I met with him and it was incredible, incredible meeting, you know, in the middle of nowhere or something, like, in the middle of the city, to meet someone who was such a close friend of mine. And so from there, I was -- I was sent to a -- to a training camp and in about six weeks they send me to the first nation. I was recruited, got the uniform, got my -- they sent me within Lithuania, in certain places to be attached to the -- there was also -- you see, there was also a Lithuanian brigade under Commander Bellinski (ph.), which was formed right when the war -- in the beginning of the war. Very brave.
Many of those people died in Russia and it was incredible. But I didn't -- I joined the regular army, which I said that is a policing force, which is called the -- it was the 33rd regimen of the , which was the border police, attached to the . After the training and after they send me to Lithuania, they send me to a place which was in -- it was in Lativa. And there they had big -- a big fight because there were the -- I don't know whether you heard about the , that is a General from Ukraine who joined the Germans and he created a Ukrainian -- Ukrainian battalion.
Almost the army who fought with the Germans against the Russians, against their own people. So there were entrenched a group of those people and they fought to the nail because they knew that if they are going to be captured, they are going to be killed. They wouldn't take them as prisoners. And there I had my first incident. I was in jeep with a captain and a driver and there was a big shelling, and it hit the jeep and I was just knocked out from the jeep and I found myself later in the hospital. Thank God I had only two broken ribs and a small -- small contusions and some other things. But the captain who was sitting next to me was killed, a Russian captain. And then from there, they sent me up to . It took me about 14, 15 days to be back on my feet. They send me to Germany, was to and participate in liberating the City of which was very interesting. And from there, they came an order to -- after a while, came an order -- a special order, that our regimen was going to be sent entirely to the Islands, to the Japanese front. And I was the only one that got the assignment to join 's army in the direction of Berlin. And this was -- and I feel that this was because the that was in charge -- I mean the , I think he was Jewish. And I told him once -- I pleaded with him, I told him, "Look, if you are going to send me to the Islands, I am going to be of no use and I am in the mood to take vengeance for my people and I think my place should be on the German front rather than on the Japanese front." So next day, I found a -- it's called , that means my assignment to travel. And this is when I traveled through Warsaw. I remember traveling through Warsaw bridge, it took us maybe an hour to pass this bridge because the bridge was completely damaged and the train was going slowly through that. And then there I joined -- I joined 's forces. And this was incredible experience, an incredible experience. And then we marched, I mean we continued to Berlin and we also liberated a concentration camp of Sachsenhausen. And we had, in our power, most of the -- of the guards from the concentration camp of Sachsenhausen. Now the --
Q: Tell me a little bit more about what you saw when you got to Sachsenhausen.
A: What we saw was -- was terrible, terrible things. I mean the , there were few people -- I mean, not too many people. I would say a few hundred people. Maybe there might be more than than that, maybe there were 1,000 people that were liberated. Most of them we found many, many, many ravines with human bodies, you know, skeletons. And it was a terrible, terrible, terrible view, you know, to see that. See what actually -- and in Sachsenhausen, there were not only Jews, there were also many, many from other different nationalities. There were Russian prisoners, there were Polocks, and there were some non-Jewish people also. We have -- we were successful because they actually -- they wanted to play the cards, actually threw away their weapons and they wanted to -- they actually surrendered. The fight was -- it was not a big fight because they felt that it's over and although there were SS, they were pure SS. They were not the . And they were all apprehended, most of them. The head of the camp and the commander of the camp and the more important people were -- they escaped. They would spend their short time -- there was also a very big stench, you know, because this camp was -- was devastated, you know. They had committed so many atrocities, apparently they wanted to move the people to move out -- to move out a little bit further because Sachsenhausen is not far from Berlin. It's like 50 kilometers from Berlin. They --
Q: We have to change the tape. No.
A: So they have decided and it was a captain that was decided that they rather than -- they rather surrender than keep up fighting. The people were -- I mean, they were, like, stunned when we came in. They didn't know. They thought we were angels. We were -- we were -- we came down from heaven, you know. They have never, never, never believed that they are going to be able to survive because that was a German camp. It was not many Germans, also, German Jews. It was a swift liberation on this -- this camp was remarkable. And then, through the guards, we found out many, many, many details in questioning them. We brought them to -- those people, we brought them to our headquarters.
End of Tape #4
Tape #5
Q: I'll let you finish --
A: Right. Let me finish -- let me finish this part, which is -- I'll tell something. One day, I will talk to Spielburg and one day we'll make a very profitable film for him. So I had my German , which I got from the chief of police when we were out hunting. I had my Russian . I had money, rubles, money in German occupational marks, and I had a little caliber. And the little caliber was -- and you will not believe for what. Not to shoot anybody, but to shoot myself if they would catch me because there's no question in my mind, they would have done this without any reproach, you know. So -- and then we moved to the -- move to the train and I figured already everything out. I figured we had a long voyage to a small town which is going to the direction to Bremen, but Bremen is in the British Zone of occupation. But I felt that -- I figured out, I said, "I know that this train is going to be searched. There is going to be a -- some type of guard is going to come in at some certain point to check the documents on the train." Because that was a normal procedure and I knew it was going to happen. I also -- I thought to myself, "It's going to come in a German guard, I'm going to show them that I am a Russian and I traveled there to see some relatives." And I didn't have a problem because I had also this , my was out of town. He was in Moscow for a conference and I had the right to travel to certain distance because I needed a special permit which I didn't have, but I could justify my trip, you know, because I didn't carry with me any belongings or anything, just maybe a small thing. Then I said, "If it comes a Russian, I'm going to identify myself as a German." What can they do? Okay. We travel. The train was crowded. I mean, so crowded it was you unable to turn. Suddenly, we come to a certain point, there's soldiers. Russians and Germans together. I said, "That's . That's . What shall I do?" And I had to think quickly. I was next to the guy with his wife and we were chatting and here comes the -- "Documents, documents, documents." I ventured to pull out my German rather than Russian and I think I made the right decision, you know. In the middle of looking at my -- checking my document, the child starts crying. And some way that tension was deflected and I was -- I think it was a sheer -- sheer luck for me, you know. And they just ask me where I traveled and I said, " a town and ." "So why do you come ?" And I said a few words in German, you know, and my worries were over. They came to the -- almost to the border. We came off and he said to me, "We have to go now. We have to walk now for about two kilometers because there is a place where I'll always go through where there is a very little -- sometimes even they don't have even a guard on the border." Because you see, it's not a natural border, not where they -- which they had -- which they made later in the later years when they had air supply, Berlin, that was much more difficult to escape. But in 1947, was still -- you know, it was still at a point where the war was still -- they were still not, not organized now. And I remember when we crossed -- I mean, we heard some shots on the other side, but it was not irrelevant. We crossed and there were -- not the last, there were quite a few people who crossed. Apparently, this was the place where we crossed the border and there was a big sign that said, "You are entering the British Zone of occupation. If you have some armorments or some illegal items, the is here, here, here. You have to immediately identify yourself and the ." I kissed the ground when I found myself in this. And then I pulled out -- first thing, I threw my pistol and I said, "Hell with that." I was going to throw it, this guy grabs me by the hand, he says, "What is that? I didn't know you were armed," he said to me. I said, "Why not?" And he said, "It's completely prohibited. You cannot have arms. I mean, it's against -- it's against the terms, you know. So who are you? You are not a smuggler like you told me." I said, "No, I'm sorry to tell you, but I'm a Russian officer." He says, "You're crazy. How come you didn't tell me?" I said, "Because I didn't feel it was relevant at the point." He said, "Give me, give me. Let me see the pistol." He says, "Oh, you know what this is. You know what, I'm going to bury that right here. When I come out I'll take it. It's worth $500." He said, "This is so beautiful. This is real -- real elephant bone handle. I mean, it's worth a fortune." I said, "You can have it. You need some marks?" I told me, "You have here marks also, because they are useless here." Because I had Russian occupation -- I mean, the German occupational marks, which belong to the Russian . The Russians -- the British and Americans all had different -- different marks now. So I gave it to him and then we went to -- from there we went to Bremen. In Bremen, we slept in the -- in the railroad station. I had my knapsack and my boots were in my pillow and we were so happy. From there I had to go to Bergen-Belsen, which was in the vicinity. Because there I had my contact. I went to Bergen-Belsen, and spend there a night. And then I found the man that's suppose to take me back to -- take me to Munich. And then I came to Munich, my friend was ecstatic. He had a little, tiny room, you know, as big as my closet here. And he says, "You can share it. You can stay here." And for the first time, I had a good meal, you know. It was fantastic, some American products and some other thing. I forget to mention to you that when we were in Berlin, I had to mention to you something very important. That I overlooked something. Being in Berlin, we have a -- I have special mission. I don't know how many people are aware, but I don't think too many are aware of that. I'm going to tell you that they have transplanted factories from Berlin to some -- they used to take them to different parts of Russia. So I was assigned a mission. It was a truck with three soldiers to go to -- they have -- take out the Company from Berlin, and they are suppose to be shipped to Lenigra (ph.) to dismantle completely.
Not only dismantled, what they have for assignment was to take the workers, including even the lowest paid guy, like, the guy that cleans the factory. Everybody had to be placed on a train by five o'clock in the morning. And we used to come with a truck and come to the house and knock on the door and say, "Be out in five minutes." So having five minutes -- so you have five minutes to get your belongings and out to the car. This was such a pleasure, this task that I had. Of course, it was nothing compared to what they have done to me. But it was, I found a certain -- although, I didn't have anything against the guys -- the guys that worked there in the factory. Now, this factory, for a fact, they were so organized -- the Russians were so disorganized, that it took them "X" amount of months to reach the destiny for the factory. And then they found out that part of the factory went to one place, to Smolensk and the other went to Lenigra. And that was -- but I had to mention that because that was a very, very unique experience, you know. Whereby, I was in charge of taking -- I mean, to -- disassembling and taking these people to the train station at five o'clock. And it was remarkable. You know, Sometimes if you remember certain -- certain -- okay. So when I came -- when I came to Munich, I -- it happened to be those people I used to send packages. Those relatives were in Feldafing.
Q: They were in Munich?
A: Next to Munich was small DP camps. One was Landsberg and the other was Feldafing. They were in Feldafing. So I stayed couple days in and then he took me to Feldafing because they are relatives. And this lady, Fruma Lankavich (ph.), she went out of her way to accommodate me and to -- and to help me out. And what I wanted basically is to get -- is to get out from Germany and go to Cuba. So there was -- I asked her -- from there, I wrote already freely to Cuba and they send me some -- they send me letters and send me also a letter saying that they have the instituted a visit for me in Paris to go -- I mean, in order to come to Cuba. Now, how do you go to Paris? I don't have any documents. I start working on documents. In the meantime, a guy came by and he said that he's capable, you know, very desperate, you know. The time was now important to get out. I mean, we just wanted to reach already a destiny. There was so many pain and suffering. So we had -- the guy said that for $100 he is going to make me false papers to travel to France. So I found a -- a friend of the family, by the name of Bernard Pickford (ph.), who also was from the Ghetto. And he was a bridageer here -- the brigade, Bernard Pickford. And he lend me the $100. And I gave it to the guy and he gave me this paper, it didn't look to me good but I figured he knows what he's doing. But through the train, we went to and to . And when we came to France, the came out and the French police took us off and sent -- was going to send us back. And I got very, very scared so I took out certain things that I had from the Russians and I just flushed then down the toilet, you know. Because I figured maybe they are going to send me back to the . At that time you were fearful, you didn't know. They might send you back to your destiny, where you were coming from. So then I came back to Feldafing and we start working . And she helped me so much, this Fruma. Fortunately, they went later to Canada and she's passed away now. So then I was able to -- I got -- I got already the real papers, went to France, and then there I had my visa. I spent in France a few days, and then I found out that in order to go to United States -- to Cuba -- I have to go to United States and I need a visa. And this is eight months -- you needed to wait for eight months to get a visa for the United States. And so I started -- I found out also another guy that was going to Cuba, by the name -- same name like me, Abraham, but his name was Rubenowitz (ph.). And he told me, "Wherever you go, I go with you." I said, "Fine." So I start walking up and down in France, in Paris, and looking. I spoke a little English so it was easier for me because he didn't and I thought -- finally, I found -- we found a maiden flight of a six-motor hydroplane from Air France. It was going to Dakar (ph.), Africa, and Portatin (ph.). And from there -- from the Dakar to Portatin. So we -- what I did is, we had our tickets from Pan American, we exchanged that and the company, they gave us credit and some way we hustled around and all together what we had was $10 in our pocket. Then we took the trip on this six-motor hydroplane and it took us -- it was an incredible flight. They gave us champagne and we felt like kings already there. And then when we came to Portatin, we had to go to Antequa (ph.) -- British Antequa. So from there, we went -- we had to take a boat and go there, to British Antequa. And from British Antequa, we found out that in order to go to Cuba, we need still an American transit visa because we have to stay in Puerto Rico, which is an American -- Q: You were carrying a French passport now? A: I didn't have a passport.
Q: No?
A: I had a paper which said "stateless," a person without a country. That was there for everybody's standards. It was so like -- so finally, in Antequa, there was a -- it's a very small British island, but very clean. I remember comparing it to the -- to the French, which was . The counsel was staying at the same hotel that we stayed at. And the lady that -- we told her our stories and she made arrangements for us to see the counsel the next day. So next day when we went in. The first question of the counsel was, "Do you have some money to sleep overnight in Puerto Rico?" I said, "Of course." I show him the $10 very proudly. When I came out, I gave it to my friend. He came in with the same $10 and show that he has also $10, because that was the minimum that you could have. And then August 1st -- and from there we cabled my uncle that we were coming down. So August 1st, 1947, and my uncle came with his car to pick me up and pick up my friend. And this was the way we came to Cuba.
Q: Long trip.
A: It was a long trip but I found somebody waiting for me. Q: Now --
A: Now, go ahead with the questions.
Q: I have a couple of questions. I want you to turn your chair back a little bit this way. A: That's not the question that's the answer.
Q: Keep going. Keep going. Now, there are a couple of things that we talked about. A: That are missing.
Q: Yes. One is the 9th Fort. A: Yeah, the -- yeah, right.
Q: In late 1943. You can tell me what your memory is for that?
A: Yes. This is precisely -- I have a book of that which I have not had a chance to read. The 9th Fort was one of the most vicious and criminal places in Lithuanian, whereby, most of the -- most of the inmates from the camps were taken. And it was -- we had few forts, but the 9th Fort was the one that's for -- were the -- it was best equipped to kill and also to dispose of the bodies. But you see, there were so many -- so many people were killed -- or murdered, not killed -- at the 9th Fort, that they didn't have -- didn't give them time to get rid of the bodies. So what they did is, they used to burn -- they used to place them in rows, you know, one top of the other one. But then, apparently towards at the end of 1943, there came an order from the command that it has to be something done in order to eliminate the bodies. So they looked for a commander and they took a number of people and -- of Jews from the -- from the Ghetto. And they had decided they had some other people which they kept there for a long time. What they used to do with those people is, after they -- after they did their -- their dirty work, they used to kill them and then bring in some new people now because they always tried to hide their tracks behind them and the evidence behind them. So they brought in this contingency of this other commander and they were there for some time and they tried to -- they exhumed the bodies and they tried to burn them. And the way they used to do that, they used to lay them in layers and put in wood in between and then pour gas and then -- of course, in the concentration camps they used crematoriums, which was more advanced technology. They did it in more primitive way. And incidentally, I have some friends who are -- especially one friend that send me now a book -- that escaped, one of the escapees. It was an incredible, incredible escape which is like escaping from Sing Sing (ph.) or for -- whereby, they have plan. They knew that they are not going to last too long because after they burn, they are going to be one of those who are going to be burned also. So what they plotted is, they found themselves that they have . They have some way got some additional -- additional liquor for the guards and when they were drunk, they traced -- they had a map of the 9th Fort and they -- some way they were able to escape and this was an escape, like, a large group of people were able to escape. And this --
Q: Where did they go? A: Pardon?
Q: Where did they go?
A: They -- many of them went to the partisans. Especially my friend. He joined the freedom fighters and he survived. I mean, he survived being in the underground in the freedom fighters.
Q: When you refer to the "partisans," are you talking about Russian partisans, Lithuanian partisans, Jewish partisans?
A: There were a mixture. There were a mixture. They had -- they had -- most of the time, they had Lithuanian -- had in some cases, they were as head of the partisans, were Lithuanian, in many cases. In more of the cases, they were Russians. But there were some few Lithuanian parties instead of partisans -- depending on what section you where in, what part of the --
Q: But did they fight together in the same groups? A: No, not necessarily, no.
Q: So when the people from -- A: Yeah.
Q: -- went out into the forest to fight like you did for a while, were you basically on your own or were you -- you had your own experience with that.
A: Yeah, I was, yes.
Q: But did they ever join up with the Russians?
A: They -- they used to try to join up at one point. But it was always -- it was -- practically, it was not to be in big groups because big groups are spotted much easier than smaller groups. Even when they had bigger groups they used to separate themselves in smaller groups and disperse themselves in different -- in different places.
Q: What I was trying to understand is if the Russians had the Jewish partisans --
A: They were a supply -- they were not -- they were in some places, they were in the , there were Jewish partisans. Some of there were still -- Bellski (ph.) . They were strong, maybe 500, 600. That was a big, big contingency. But there were . You know what means? It's a forest which is very dense and very, very difficult to penetrate. It's like a jungle. But normally, Lithuania was not so dense, especially where we were, close to not a great, great forest.
. There was a forest but it was not this type --
Q: How many -- how long were you out in the forest? A: About five weeks.
Q: Would you say that as a full sentence? A: Pardon? Pardon?
Q: Would you say that as a full sentence?
A: Oh, yeah. I was about close to five weeks in the far away from Kovno.
. , which is not too
Q: When you -- when you traveled back into Kovno with the Russian army and you saw what had happened to the city. It must have been a -- it must have been an incredible feeling to go back into --
A: You mean when I came back to the Ghetto? First -- first trip was my trip was to the Ghetto. I mean, I was very anxious to find out what happened to the house where I lived and to the -- and to the basement where we had -- where ingeniously, we used to make basements even during the time in the Ghetto, in many places. And that's the reason why they -- somebody -- somebody -- I mean, betrayed us, you know. There were somebody betrayed many, many of us. But that's one of reasons why they came in. How did the Germans find out? Because this was done so carefully. The sand or the soil was taken so carefully and it was done in the nighttime. And it was like -- like -- termites, you know, a slow, very slow process. And how did they know where it is? Imagine, in my house, when I came in, we had -- what we had is steps to the second floor. So what we did is, it was, like, professionally engineered. We were able to take out a whole step and right through there, slide into the basement.
Q: To hide?
A: Pardon?
Q: To hide?
A: To hide. To hide -- in fact, hide things -- where I -- where we hide my cousin. Q: A lot of people made hiding places?
A: A lot of people made hiding places, yeah. And for some reason, they found out. My place was open. When I came, it was open. And I found only some photographs. I didn't find anything else, you know. But it was not -- it was not destroyed. It was not burned. But in many other cases, were burned. And some people were buried under the -- under the rubble of the -- they used to come in and throw grenades to make sure that -- the Germans would come into a house and whether there is somebody or not, throw a grenade and everything would -- if one was not sufficient, throw other grenade.
Q: Did you see any Jewish people around? Were there people around when you --
A: No. When I came I didn't see anybody. I mean, I saw people wandering, but I found out that there were -- there were -- few families saved themselves. And they were able to come out to come -- although they exploded most of them, put few families -- but that was really -- I came in it was already, like, five, six days after they liberated the city, so people already came out. Some way they sensed that they are free and they came out, so I was not able. But I went -- I went in down to the -- and I found some on photographs which I -- which I cherish. And I have them with me so far. So --
Q: Do you think that there was a special spirit of defiance in Kovno, when people -- like, the people escaping from the 9th Fort or the hiding or the going to the forest? Do you thing there was something unique about this, as a spiritual resistance?
A: Of course. I think it was in every place. The only thing is that people -- it's very hard for people to understand that the Lithuania was -- you see, I don't know about Poland as much, you know -- but in Lithuanian, it was very difficult to penetrate and to go threw because we had two layers of difficulties. One was that the Lithuanians were very, very much anti-semetic in a sense and they would betray -- most of them, you know, most of them -- betray anybody that tried to hide or trying to reach something. Because many -- most of my friends were killed by -- were -- were -- I mean, caught by -- caught by Lithuanians. The same time, I was almost caught by Lithuanians. It was not a German. German wouldn't know me from nothing, whether I am Jewish or not. But they have sense -- they -- they were able to identify. And it was extremely, extremely difficult and they were not cooperative. They didn't provide you with arms, they betrayed you, they did everything possible to hurt you rather than to help you. So it was extremely difficult but the spirit of resistance was always there. Of course, we didn't have this help necessary. You have to -- you have to have outside help in order -- without outside help, you cannot do anything, you know. I mean, it's not a matter that you can serve yourself. Where are you going to get armorments or where are you going to? I mean, you have to have help contact. Not withstanding that is -- is -- End of Tape #5 Conclusion of Interview
