United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Rachel Bielicka Gurdus
August 17, 1999
RG-50.030*0400 PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a taped interview with Rachel Bielcka Gurdus, conducted on August 17, 1999 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
RACHEL BIELICKA GURDUS
August 17, 1999
Beginning Tape One
Question: I think to begin, if you could just say your name at birth.
Answer: My name at birth was Rachel Bielicka -- Bielicka. I was born in Wilna, so my parents. I was the youngest in the family, and my mother had five daughters.
Q: And when were you born?
A: 1922, December.
Q: December?
A: December 6. And my oldest sister was 18 and a half years older than me. So when I was born, after a half a year, she went to study to Warsaw. And she established there and get married there, and she lived in Warsaw. So my other sister, Riva, when I was five, she also went to Warsaw and established there and get married there, finish school, and -- but we were [indecipherable] very open. They used to come every vacation, and every holiday, as Passover, as Rosh Hashanah they used to come home for a little while, and return also to Warsaw. For vacation when the kids were born, they send the kids to us, and we used to go together to a summer place, to spend the summer together.
Q: Can you tell --
A: And my parents were businessmen who have a mill. And two little buildings at the place [indecipherable] that went to fight. We never changed the address before the war because we have there our own home and we live there. When the war start in ’39 --
Q: B-Before we go there --
A: Yes?
Q: I just wanted to see if you could tell us the names of your parents?
A: The name of my mother was Minalaya, and the name of my father was Benjamin. My father was 18 years older than my mother. My mother married she was less than 18 in that time, you know? And -- but they have a good relationship, a good life. And five children were born, and that’s it, and my daughter, my older sister left Warsaw when I was maybe a half a year. And, successful there.
Q: Do you know the names of your grandparents? Did they live nearby?
A: My grandparents? I never have grandparents. My grandmother died when I was six months old, seven months old. My fa -- my m -- grandfather died before my mother was married. And the parents of my father also died before he was married. So I don’t remember. The name of my mother, the maiden name was Apatova, Apatova.
Q: And were your mother and father also from Wilna?
A: Wilna, yes --
Q: Okay.
A: -- yes. The family of my father has a big farm, as I know from the stories that my sister told me. Because you know, when you are 15 - 16, you don’t get in what happened between your parents and the grandparents. When you are a little child you are busy with school, with children, with friends. And when I meet my sisters from Warsaw, after 18 years that they also survived the war, they told me stories about my parents, and they told me that my father’s family have a big farm, and they have 13 children. And from ev -- to every child they have tutors, especially. They didn’t go to school, at -- every child has a tutor. And in the family was a couple of rabbis, they were very educated because I remember my father, he knew fluently Hebrew, he knew English, he knew very well math -- mathematics. When I have some difficulty in school, he used to tell me, and in meantime, all kind of stories, in spite that he was very busy with his business. My mother wasn’t working, she helped out a little bit my father, and then she took care of the tenants there, the -- the -- her buildings. She was busy. She likes very much flowers, she has a beautiful garden of flowers that took a lot of her time, and took care of the children, who are still study, and that’s what is. And --
Q: What do you remember about when you were growing up about the role that religion played in your family life?
A: My father was religious, and he was als -- always going to the synagogue, I remember, very early in the morning and then in the evenings. And it was a traditional house, and the s -- all the holidays were celebrating in the house, and that -- and sisters with their husbands came from Warsaw, and it was so nice, the Passover, and the Shavuot and the Rosh Hashanah, and the -- all the holidays. And as I remember my sisters when they grew up, they were not religious, they were socialists, most of them. And that what it is. But when I was very small my sister went to study in Warsaw. Financially they were not so good in that time in my family, and my sister was very brilliant, she was a very capable person. And all of a sudden she want to go to Warsaw when she finish high school, with also [indecipherable] like here is A’s, and she find out that there was a new nursery school establish in Warsaw from the Joint from the United States. And she said she wants to go to this school. And my mother was against, she said, ”You are such a capable person, why do you want to be a nurse?” She said, “I decided.” She said, “You are afraid for blood, and you’ll be a nurse, working?” And she said yes. And she went to school. And that time in Warsaw through the school, they took all the 14 students. The director was sent for the -- from the school from the United States. And th -- when she came to Warsaw she had all her ticket in one side. They said, it’s full. They have the four student. She said, “But I can’t go home, I don’t have a ti -- another ticket.” And they said -- her diploma was excellent, and they looked at her, they said, “Wait. Maybe one of them will change her mind, then you’ll take her place.” And after two days somebody went out, and they put her in. And she finished the school, and it was next to the hospital, a Jewish hospital on Chista in Warsaw. And she finished the school, and then they send her to Paris to finish special school for teachers, for -- to the nurses school, meaning that she’ll return and she’ll be in the -- between the teachers, the t --
Q: The teaching staff.
A: -- in the teaching staff. And she finish the school in Paris, very excellent and return to Poland and start to be an instructor in the same school. And then the war start, and the director went to the USA for funds or something, and she -- the director of the school -- and there were dormitory in the school that the students came from all of Poland and from all over. In that time it was a Jewish nurses school. And she was very good, and the war start. And the war start, and lot of people start to come to Wilna because you remember that there were a pa -- a pact between Molotov and Hitler and they divided Poland in two, and Wilna get Russia and Warsaw start to be -- and the community was very bad, but in the very beginning, as soon as the Germans start to come to Poland -- people from Poland run away, and lots came through Wilna. She couldn’t, because she was responsible for the chil -- the students, they were 17 - 18 - 19 years girls who live there. She couldn’t leave them and run away. That’s why she was staying in Poland, and my other sister also came to Warsaw to finish the nursery school where my sister was director, and she was a nurse. And she didn’t want to leave her, so she was staying with her, so --
Q: What were their names, those two sisters?
A: One was Luba.
Q: The oldest one was Luba?
A: Luba. She was Luba Bielicka Blume. And the other was Riva Kakanovich. And the war start, and there was in the beginning, the --
Q: But before we go to the war Rachel, I just want to spend a little --
A: Yes?
Q: -- more time. Can you tell us a little bit more about your father’s mill, and the business? What was a regular day like?
A: He used to wake up four in the morning, because when peasants were going from all the county to the market, they used to leave their grain and all the stuff to make kasha and flour and everything in the very morning. And the -- my father knew them all and they -- he prepared the stuff. And they used to go to the market, which was in the middle of the city. About nine, 10 o’clock, the m -- they sold their products, they returned and pick up the flour and then the kasha and whatever it was. And they used to go back to their county and during the day they have two people who helped him, and he was working in there.
Q: Were the people who were bringing their goods to be milled, were they Jews and non-Jews?
A: No, no, only non-Jews.
Q: Non-Jews?
A: Only non-Jews. They were the peasants who live in the periph -- periphery of the city, not in the middle of the city, but a little bit behind. It was Wilna, but you know, in the suburb. And that’s what I remember, all the time being busy and I was in school. I was in school. My school was not far from my house, it was four or five miles, walking every day to school. And my sisters too. And then I finish sixth grade of the beginning school and start to go to gymnasium, to the first grade of gymnasium, until ‘39 when the Russians came, they changed the whole system of the schools because there was 10 - 11 grades and that’s all. And we were in the fourth year of gymnasium, they make us the eight -- the eighth grade from 10 - 11 year school. And we have to start to learn in Russian, because there was no Yiddish school any more. And --
Q: Can you talk a little bit about -- you mentioned how educated your father was.
A: Yeah.
Q: And your two older sisters were going off to study nursing and to become teachers.
A: My fim -- yes, but my older sister, they finish gymnasium before it.
Q: Right.
A: To the school in Warsaw, to the nursing school in Warsaw they have to come after high school.
Q: But what was -- what did your mother and father, what were their views about education and going on to study?
A: My mother was all the time for education. My father said sometimes, you know, why should you educate them so much? They’ll be very educated more than you are, they will leave you and they’ll went somewhere else, you’ll never see. And my mother said, no, they have to be educated. And my father said, I am old, and who will take the business? They have to stay home to ta -- my mother said no, they are too intelligent to, and they want to go out.
Q: Interesting. W-Was your father trying to get one of the younger daughters to learn the business?
A: She wants some of the son-in-laws, but they were far away. My son -- my brother-in-law, the husband of Luba, was Abrasha Blume. They were dating in school, and then she went to Warsaw to study in the nursing school, and he went to berli -- to Belgium to study in the university. And they fee -- they dating during the vacation time, and when they finished school, he returned to Warsaw and they get married. And during the Holocaust he was one of the leaders of the uprising -- of the Warsaw ghetto uprising in Warsaw. And he finish engineering, I don’t remember exactly the -- and it was hard for him to get a job, even that he finish excellent. And then they said, if you finish another year in Poland, you’ll surely get the job as an engineer. And he finish another year in Poland, and he still couldn’t get a job in his field. He was a very nice person. And then he start to work in the Bund organization. You know what Bund is, it’s socialism, that time it was very high, and the war started. And my sister was all the time in the school, and this whole hold her until the end of her life.
Q: Can you talk a little bit about the relation, the sit -- th-the position of your family in the community? Was your -- was your family involved in politics in any way? Did your father [indecipherable] the synagogue?
A: No. My father was involved in the synagogue.
Q: In the synagogue? [indecipherable]
A: All the time he was a [indecipherable] in the synagogue and -- in our area, in our area.
Q: What did that mean? A: In our area was a synagogue and he was a member and he was some body of the oldest there. And as I remember all the time [indecipherable] synagogue, and the celebrations of the holidays and -- but the children not. The children not and he let them go their way. Yeah, he didn’t presh. And I didn't know if it would help because there were other -- e-every sister of mine were very independent. I have two in Wilna, and the other two were in Warsaw.
Q: Wa -- wa -- ho-how do you explain that, that you were all such independent girls?
A: They went to school, they belonged to all kind of organizations, and when they finished, they got good jobs, and they get married, and they live in different cities, and my -- I have two other sisters who were older than me. One was Sela, she finished a -- a professional school making heads, you know? And my other sister, Brina was four years older than me, a beautiful girl, and she finished a professional school, tailoring.
Q: Can I just clarify, making heads? Make --
A: Modistes --
Q: Wigs?
A: Sh -- how can I tell it in? Modiska is -- she makes heads, special heads. Hats.
Q: Hats, hats.
A: Hats, I’m sorry, I am sorry.
Q: I’m so -- okay, that’s okay. That’s okay, that’s -- that’s fine, that’s --
A: Hats, yes.
Q: Oh, so you were the --
A: It was a profession in that time.
Q: Right. You were the -- you were the baby?
A: I was the baby, I was the very smallest from all. I told you, between me and my sister was 18 and a half years a difference.
Q: I didn’t know you were the baby.
A: I was the baby.
Q: Huh. A-And can you speak some about the friends that you had, or that your family had? Did you have Jewish and non-Jewish friends?
A: Yes.
Q: Or one or the other?
