Interview with Gert Silver
March 30, 2006 Beginning Tape One, Side A
Question: -- project at the Jewish Holocaust Museum in Melbourne. I’m Geri Crest interviewing Gert Silver on the 27th of March, 2006. Can you begin the interview by telling us where and when you were born?
Answer: I was born in Berlin on the 30th of August, 1928.
Q: Can you tell us about your family life in Berlin? Who was in your immediate family?
A: Well, there was my mother, my father, I had a seven year old brother, and subsequently had a seven year younger sister. So there were three of us, each separated by seven years.
Q: Mm-hm. The names of your siblings?
A: My brother was called Paul, my sister was called Ruth.
Q: And your parents?
A: My father was called Erish, my mother Nancy.
Q: And your mother’s maiden name?
A: Halen. H -- H-a-l-e-n.
Q: Where did she come from?
A: From a place in Poland called Kolamair in Galitsia.
Q: And where did your father come from?
A: My father was born in Berlin.
Q: How many generation German was your father?
A: I don’t really know, I know that his father was already born in Germany, beyond that I have no knowledge.
Q: Mm-hm. So what did your father do?
A: He had a garment factory in partnership with a non-Jewish German woman.
Q: Explain. What sort of garments?
A: I thi -- I don’t really know, I think they made ladies’ clothing.
Q: Mm-hm.
A: But I don’t -- I really don’t know too much about what they manufactured. I went to the factory every now and then, out of curiosity, but I was too young to remember.
Q: Mm-hm, mm-hm. And your mother?
A: My mother stayed at home. She looked after the children and her husband.
Q: Mm-hm. Extended family, grandparents, aunts, uncles and cousins?
A: My grandparents on my mother’s side were alive. My grandparents on my father’s side, as far as I remember, were no longer alive when I was born, or when I was young. And I had aunts and uncles and cousins.
Q: From which side?
A: Both sides, but mostly from my father’s side.
Q: How many siblings did he have?
A: My father had a brother who had two children, and my -- my mother had a brother who had two daughters, cousins, first cousins, one of whom is still alive in America.
Q: What’s her name?
A: Edna Wolfe. She lives in San Diego, in California.
Q: And the other aunt and uncles and cousins?
A: All the others died, except one aunt, a sister of my father, who emigrated to Chile, and she obviously -- she survived the war there.
Q: And her name?
A: Zallinger, Edna Zallinger. Actually, an aunt also survived in Berlin. She was marri -- she was no -- not Jewish. She was married to my mother’s brother, and she survived because she wasn't Jewish. And her two daughters also survived in Berlin, first cousins. One of them lives in San Diego at the moment, the other passed away some time ago.
Q: But the grandparents on your mother’s side, they were Polish?
A: Yes, I would think so.
Q: Did you have a close relationship with them?
A: They died when I was fairly young, sa -- maybe even before I went to school, so I remember very, very little of them.
Q: What language was spoken at home?
A: German.
Q: Any other languages?
A: No.
Q: Did you learn another language at school?
A: Oh yes, I went to a Jewish school in Berlin, and from day one we were taught two foreign languages, Hebrew and English, and in fact we were forbidden to speak a word of German during those lessons, was total immersion lesson. And after two or three years, I was fi -- reasonably fluent in both Hebrew and English. So that’s the time to teach children foreign languages.
Q: Did you maintain those languages, Hebrew --
A: To a certain extent. I mean, I can still understand simple Hebrew, and English of course, I -- I knew when I came here.
Q: Tell me about your Jewish day school.
A: I went to a number of Jewish day schools in Berlin. The Jewish schools in Berlin were just fantastic, when I compare them with the day schools in so -- in -- non-Jewish day schools in Germany. As the war -- o-or as Hitler’s power progressed, more and more Jewish boys and girls who originally went to non-Jewish schools in Germany were expelled from those schools, and wer -- had to come to our school, they were a year or two behind us. The standard of education in the Jewish schools in Berlin was just fantastic.
Q: What was the name of your school?
A: Oh, my first school was in the August Strasse, then I went to the Kaiser Strasse, then I went to the Gross Hamburger Strasse. Schools closed, or they bombed. So I went to three different schools in Berlin.
Q: And your siblings attended the same school?
A: Yes.
Q: Were they close to your home?
A: Well, my sister was seven when -- she was born in ’35, so she didn’t go to school at all. She was four when the war broke out.
Q: Were they close to your home?
A: Yes, oh yes, walking distance.
Q: Your neighborhood, where was that?
A: I lived in a neighborhood that wasn’t -- you wouldn’t call it ex -- exactly a Jewish neighborhood, but there were a sprinkling of Jews, but most of them, of course, were non-Jewish.
Q: So you [indecipherable] non-Jewish neighbors?
A: Yes, yeah.
Q: Did you have relationships with them?
A: Not really, I think ma -- almost all of my friends were Jewish, and I had no non-Jewish friends. And I doubt whether my parents had any non-Jewish friends.
Q: Mm-hm. What were your hobbies as a young boy?
A: I think I was just a good student. I -- I loved school. Holidays were something that I abhorred. And I don’t really have -- don’t recall any hobbies I had in those days.
Q: Did you belong to a youth movement?
A: No.
Q: Were there youth movements that you were aware of?
A: Oh yes, there was Maccabee, there was Ha-Koah, there were seven Zionist organizations. I don’t think I belonged to any of them.
Q: Okay. What about your parents, were they involved [indecipherable]
A: They were involved in the synagogue and I was -- and I sang as a boy in the choir of the biggest synagogue in Berlin, located in the Oranienburger Strasse. It’s a very famous synagogue with its golden dome, and I sang there as a choirboy. So I went to all the services. My parents didn’t go, only went to the services on the high holidays.
Q: And you went every week?
A: Yeah, because I was in the choir.
Q: How did you get involved in that?
A: I think they looked for choir boys, the -- the choir looked for boys who were interested in singing, who were reasonably musical in the Jewish schools, and I volunteered.
Q: So [indecipherable] Friday night and --
A: Friday night, Saturday morning. We often sang at weddings, funerals occasionally. I have very fond memories of my activity as a choir boy.
Q: Mm-hm. Did you play an instrument as well?
A: I played the recorder and the mouth organ, but very badly, both of them.
Q: Uh-huh, okay. What was the level of religion in your home?
A: I don’t know how you would describe it. Probably similar to the liberals here, and [indecipherable]. I thi --
Q: The celebration of festivals [indecipherable]
A: Oh yes, oh yes. Well, being in a Jewish school we celebrated Purim, Sukkot, Pesach, everything.
Q: Mm-hm. Your family, however, belonged to an Orthodox synagogue?
A: No, my family also belonged to that synagogue in the Oranienburger Strasse which wasn’t exactly -- which wasn't Orthodox at all, nor was it Liberal. It’s probably, if you compare it to a synagogue in Melbourne, it’s probably like Charnwood Grove, or Toorak Road.
Q: Mm-hm. What -- what can you remember about any anti-Semitic incidences?
A: I remember a lot of them, I mean we were very often beaten up on walks on our way to school or from school by Hitler youth. And --
Q: What -- what -- what -- we’re talking after 1933.
A: After 1933, between ’33 and ’39.
Q: Who’s we? A: Well, school kids, friends of mine, when we walked home from school, or when we walked to school, very often there were mobs of Hitler youth and they just beat us up, and nobody came to our rescue.
Q: How badly beaten? Can you give me some idea?
A: I don’t think we had injuries, but they were painful. We ran away.
Q: Did you fight back?
A: Always that we were outnumbered at all times, and none of the bystanders came to our help.
Q: How often did this happen?
A: Maybe once or twice a month. I mean, we looked out for them, and if we saw any Hitler youths in the neighborhood, tried to avoid them, but it wasn’t always possible.
Q: How were they identified as Hitler youth?
A: Oh, they had the uniform.
Q: How old would these boys have been?
A: Probably our age, maybe a little bit older, 10 - 11 - 12. They just did it for fun.
Q: When you say you were outnumbered, what sort of numbers were they?
A: Well very often I walked to school with two friends, and very often there was a dozen of them. So we had very little hope.
Q: Did you report them to anybody?
A: We reported to that school, but the school couldn’t do much either. When it happened occa -- more frequently than at other times, our parents, or one of our parents walked with us to school, and that provided protection. They didn’t attack anybody who was accompanied by an adult.
Q: Did it happen to girls as well?
A: I don’t know. I don’t know the answer to that question.
Q: Mm-hm. Did you see them often in the street, even if they weren’t involved in --
A: Oh [indecipherable] Hitler youth all the time. I mean, it was a government -- it was Hitler’s youth movement. They were proud to show their uniforms, so it was part of the day to day scenery in Berlin.
Q: What did it mean to you at that age, as a young boy?
A: The enemy.
Q: So how did that make you feel about your home?
A: I don’t know how to answer that question. I -- I felt terribly uncomfortable and fearful at times. It wasn’t a very pleasant experience to grow up in Berlin after Hitler came to power.
Q: How did your parents deal with it?
A: They were equally apprehensive, and to this day I will never know why my parents didn’t leave Germany. I mean, if I read the literature today of how Jews were treated in the immediate pre-Hitler period, and after Hitler came to power, it was relatively easy to leave Germany. Why my parents didn’t leave, I will never know, but they were not alone, I mean, there were possibly a hundred thousand Jews in-in -- in Germany, maybe even more, who stayed in Germany. Many of them thought that Hitler would never attack the German Jews.
Q: Do you know people that left Germany at that time?
A: Oh, many of them, I -- many of them here in Melbourne.
Q: Friends of yours?
A: Yes. Yes, if I ha -- the signals were so clear, right from 1933 when Hitler came to power, but there was go -- there were going to be enormous problems. And why my parents didn’t leave, I will never know. I mean, it wasn’t always easy, reading the literature now, to get permits to emigrate -- or to immigrate, rather. To emigrate was relatively easy in the early years of Hitler. But to get permits to America, to Australia, to some of the other countries, was relatively difficult. I think the only country that admitted Jews in unlimited numbers was Shanghai, and I think the Dominican Republic.
Q: So the people that you knew that were leaving, where were they going to?
A: Some of them went to England, some of them went to France and were later caught in France during the war. Many of them went to America, my aunt emigrated to Chile.
Q: In what year?
A: Either ’37 or ’38. My uncle emigrated to Shanghai, and survived the war in Shanghai, returned to Berlin at the end of the war and died there. So --
Q: Natural causes?
A: Yes, yeah. So it was possible to leave Germany, but my parents, like so many others, obviously totally underestimated the consequences.
Q: What -- what comment can you make about your standard of living in Germany?
A: We got progressively poorer. I think we were middle class when I was a child, and as the -- as the economical strains on Jews became increasingly difficult, I think our standard of living became lower. And of course, from ’39 on, all food was rationed, with a special ration card for Jews, and we got significantly less food than --
Q: We’ll come to that later.
A: Yeah, sure.
Q: So what changes took place? You said you got progressively poorer. What -- what -- what do you remember changing --
A: We moved to, I think lower class residences, lower class districts.
Q: With your household?
A: Yeah. Well, we didn’t live in a house, we always lived in apartments.
Q: Was that your apartment, or rented?
A: All rented, we rented, I think. I’m almost certain it was rented. And that was basically it. I-I know we became poorer, although parents normally don’t discuss their financial affairs with their teenagers, their -- with their 10 or 11 year olds.
Q: So [indecipherable]
A: But don’t forget I was 11 when the -- when the war started, I was four when Hitler came to power.
Q: So where did you move to?
A: To the last residence that I’ve shown in that [indecipherable] in a district in Berlin called Weding, of all places. And we moved there, and that -- it was from there that I was deported.
Q: What happened with school?
