United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Pranas Jurkus
April 30, 2012
RG-50.030*0657 PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a recorded interview with Pranas Jurkus, conducted by Ina Navazelskis on April 30, 2012 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview took place in Highland Park, IL and is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
PRANAS JURKUSPRIVATE
April 30, 2012
Question: This is a United States Holocaust Memorial Museum interview with Mr. Pranas Jurkus, taking place on April 30th, 2012, in Highland Park, Illinois. And thank you very much Mr. Jurkus for agreeing to speak with us today. I understand that you, as a young person were a witness to some aspects of the Holocaust in Lithuania, and we would like to talk to you about that. But before we get to those events, we’d like to find out a little bit about you. Could you tell us where you were born, when you were born, and a little bit about your family?
Answer: Yes. I was born 1927.
Q: What’s the date?
A: April 15, in Lithuania, Kretinga. It was a little provincial town, but was Apskritis region town. And we felt that the town is big for us.
Q: How many people lived in Kretinga?
A: There – I understand that at that time was 7,000 people.
Q: Okay.
A: 7,000 people that – but they had all the offices what – what big towns had, and –you know, and – and then –
Q: Who was your father? What was his –
A: My – my father was a carpenter, builder. He not only carpenting, but he did the – he build houses too. Wood houses. And, not only that, he made music instruments, cymbals and violin. And the one event that I remember, that he was constantly consulting with one Jewish guy, Mortkis(ph). Mortkis(ph) [indecipherable] i-in Kretinga was that – who used to sell ice cream, the best ice cream. And I remember that he was building one violin, and my father. And that violin was later by my sisters given to the museum in Kretinga.
Q: I don’t understand, di – was your father making a violin for this gentleman, for Mortka –
A: No –
Q: No.
A: – for himself.
Q: Your father was making it for hims –
A: He just – as a – as a carpenter.
Q: Okay.
A: He was very handy, he wanted to make.
Q: Okay.
A: He decided to make. And they both com-competed – competing.
Q: Oh, so Mr. Mortkis(ph) also made –
A: With – Mortkis(ph) was carpenter too.
Q: Ah, and they would see whose violin –
A: And – whose violin is the best sounding in all [indecipherable]. I remember only that – that he was constantly, every part, comparing with that – that Mortkis(ph). And that’s what – actually there was the – the contact with the Jewish people. And I know that he was, you know, we – we constantly – and he used to get matzo. And this was, for kids, that was something unusual.
Q: Did you like it?
A: Oh, I – I like. I like very much.
Q: Yeah.
A: So – and then –
Q: I want to know more – a little bit about your family. Your father’s name?
A: My – my – my father was born in Jokubavas. My mother was from Kalvarija.
Q: What was her name?
A: Ona.
Q: And his name?
A: His was Pranas.
Q: Pranas.
A: Yeah.
Q: Like you.
A: Exactly.
Q: Or you like him.
A: Yes, I think that this was a – a custom.
Q: Okay.
A: To make the first son always the father’s name. And then I had one older, two years older sister, Yedviga(ph). Then one – and two younger. Was Adele, [indecipherable] Alduta(ph).
Q: And Alduta would be –
A: Alut – [break]
Q: Okay. So tell us a little – tell us a little bit about your family. Your – it sounds to me like you were the only boy in a family of all – of all girls, is that so?
A: Yes, that’s true.
Q: Okay.
A: I was the only one son, and three girls.
Q: And did all of you go to school?
A: We all went to school. Wi – grammar school, is usually the first, and then high school. And when I left Lithuania, 1944, the – Mother died 1944, February. She was very young, she was 46.
Q: Very young.
A: And the father left – and I left Father with three – three sisters in Lithuania.
Q: So that means that when you left, you left alone?
A: I left alone.
Q: You left alone.
A: I –
Q: We’ll get to that part.
A: Yeah.
Q: We’ll get to that part. But let’s start – tell me about what kind of a person your father was. What do you remember about him?
A: My father was nine years older than my mother. He was born 1886, yeah. He was a – already a old man when he – when he married. I understand that he was drafted in a Russian army, and he was fighting in World War I, and the first days or first week, he was taken prisoner by Germans, and he spent four years in Berlin, in a prison camp.
Q: Oh my. Did he talk about that at home?
A: He talked little bit that. And he had a good – good – a good job, he was actually working to one German officer as his housekeeper.
Q: Your father?
A: Yes.
Q: While he was in Berlin?
A: While he was in Berlin.
Q: Okay.
A: And when he came home, I think so then he went to trade school in Siauliai. He finished there his trade. He was actually graduated with [speaks Lithuanian]
Q: Oh, sort of like craftsman.
A: Craftsman, yeah. And then he started to work in his field. There were two brothers in Jokubavas. The first brother was older, and one sister. The first brother, Yoses(ph) got all the utis(ph).
Q: The land.
A: All the farm – the land. And he was paid and he went in the world.
Q: So that meant that according to traditions of the time, the older brother continued the family farm?
A: Con-Continued the family farm.
Q: And your father got some kind of monetary compensation?
A: Yes.
Q: And he came then came to Kretinga? Is that what –
A: He came to Kretinga.
Q: And he set up shop there? He more or less was – started his life –
A: He was – he was working.
Q: As – his life as a carpenter.
A: Yeah, he was working. I think f – not a shop, but when he married, then he had his place where he had his tools, and he was doing as a carp – carpentry.
Q: And so he –
A: And then going to one place [indecipherable] that, wherever people needed, he was doing the job.
Q: Did he build the house that you lived in? A: No. He build a house for some priests, not far away there, from – from – from the cloister, from the church.
Q: What were the values that your father had? Was he a religious person?
A: He was a – he was very conservative. Not too religious. He was reading that Lithuanian newspapers, more like on a – on a religious side, I remember. But – and he went to church not every Sunday, but you know, as the church rules, you have to attend before Christmas, before Easter. So he was that kind of – not [indecipherable], but he was Katalikas.
Q: He was a Catholic.
A: Yeah.
Q: He was not a – he was not a very fervent Catholic –
A: Yeah.
Q: – but nevertheless.
A: No.
Q: Okay.
A: Mother was a little bit different, but Mother was as a mother, not too religious. But you know, wanted that the kids, you know, be religious. I myself, you know, I – I – I served as a – as a altar boy, and – but I was not too religious.
Q: What kind of atmosphere do you remember from your family life?
A: Very nice.
Q: Yeah?
