United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Kurt Julich
October 31, 2006
RG-50.030*0511
PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a videotaped interview with Kurt Julich, conducted on October 31, 2006 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview took place in Delray Beach and is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
KURT JULICH
October 31, 2006
Beginning Tape One
Question: Good morning, Kurt.
Answer: Good morning.
Q: It’s nice to be with you here in Delray Beach.
A: Pleasure.
Q: Kurt, when were you born?
A: August 10th, 1922.
Q: And what was your name then?
A: Kurt Julich.
Q: So it’s the same name now?
A: Same name.
Q: Can you spell your last name?
A: Julich.
Q: And where were you born?
A: In Cologne, Germany.
Q: And l-let’s talk a little bit about your -- your family and your brother. So tell me what did your father do?
A: My father had a business in Cologne, and --
Q: You know what kind?
A: Oh yeah, yeah. At that time -- we’re talking in the 30’s, it was very fashionable that lady used to wear lacy jabot and things like that.
Q: What is a lace jabot?
A: It’s those --
Q: Jacket?
A: -- those things there that, you know, puffy lace, you know?
Q: Ah, ah, I see.
A: And then also lace for decoration of various dresses, gowns, whatever. And also buttons in mother of pearl, and basically that’s what it was. He had an office acro -- pretty much across the street in Cologne [indecipherable] where the eau de Cologne, which is called corniche eswassa, have their offices. 4711 is the name of the cologne, which will be on every bottle, so his office was across the street, you know? And a fairly large office with, of course, what you would call the storage area for the product and whatnot. And few employees and a partner. So he was on the road half of the time, selling, and then he switched with his partner and he stayed in the office and did the paperwork as it would be, and so on and so forth. And then of course when Hitler came, and it was before Hitler was sworn in, he couldn’t make -- he wasn’t allowed to make a living any more. You see, history has a way of being a little bit mistaken at times. He had to stop his business in ’32, before Hitler was actually sworn in as the head man there, as it would be.
Q: Why did he have to stop?
A: Because Jews weren’t allowed to have a business any more.
Q: Uh-huh.
A: And so my grandfather, who lived a few -- you know, few miles out in a very lovely town called Siegburg. And he had the very large house there. And so my father, mother and my brother and I, we went to live there. And I lived there until 1933, August 17th, when I left for France and I got some French tutoring lessons before I went there, but I had taken French in what you commonly call in Germany, gymnasium.
Q: Mm-hm.
A: Which would be sort of like high school - college mixture because you can start with -- like you don’t even have to go to a public school, you can start and finish pretty much, you know and graduate there. So I was in one of these and their main language was French. And obviously I had the heads up for French, you know?
Q: Right. Tell me something about what your father was like when you were growing up, before -- before you left and before you have to move from Cologne to your grandfather’s and grandmother’s house.
A: Well, he wa --
Q: Were you close with your father?
A: Oh yeah. He was -- he was really strict, but he was perfect, you know? No nonsense, but he loved us very much. And he was on the road the whole week and he came home Friday night, you know, for religious purposes, I guess, you know. And Saturday and Sunday and that allowed him to catch up on his accounting for what he did during the week, also. So I saw him Friday, Saturday and Sunday, Monday he was gone again. And actually, I would say -- how old was I? Maybe seven, eight -- six, seven, eight years old, I don’t know for sure, he got sick and tired of traveling with those big sample cases, so he hired -- he bought a car and he hired a chauffeur, because he was not very adept at driving. That wasn’t his forte. At that time obvi -- obviously he had to shift, so he had the chauffeur and in the morning it was very nice, the chauffeur took us around the block to the school. You know, I was in what you call grade school, you know, it was very nice. And oh, of course, that ceased after a little while, as -- it’s quite obvious.
Q: What was your father’s name, his first name?
A: Leo.
Q: Leo. And what about your mother? Your mother’s name is what?
A: Martha.
Q: Mm-hm. And what was she like?
A: Perfect.
Q: She was perfect.
A: Angel. Wonderful. And she -- well, like I said, she was born in my grandfather’s town, which was like oh, let’s say 10 miles away. It was a small town called Siegburg, which was very, very picturesque. I mean, without seeing a picture, you can’t believe it, but -- and so my grandfather had plenty of room there. She had three sisters who were, when I was born, maiden aunts, and I guess this is why I loved women, because I was always pampered, I was -- first of all, I was the first male grandchild around, so you know, it’s -- left an impression on me, I had three lovely aunts, you know?
Q: And did your father have siblings, did your fa --
A: Yeah. My father had one sister and two brothers.
Q: Uh-huh.
A: He happened to be a twin. My grandmother on my father’s side had 12 children, of which eight died. You know, it wasn't like nowadays, you know. Didn’t have the medications to keep you alive and what not. And so four -- four of them lived. His twin died, he survived. He had two brothers, and one sister. And they lived little bit further away in a beautiful town in the mountains, in the Eyffel. It was called Münster Eyffel. Münster is sort of like an abbey, and then Eyffel is the mountain, you know.
Q: Right.
A: And it was up in the mountains and it was a resort town for pulmonary problem people. And it was, I don’t know, a thousand years old, and things [indecipherable] have pictures about all this, which words don’t describe everything properly, a picture is worth a thousand words --
Q: Right, right.
A: -- we -- we all know that, you know. So -- and so we went a few times here. We were much closer to my mother’s --
Q: Mm-hm, family.
A: -- family, obviously, it’s always the way, you know. Children are closer to their mother than they are to the father, it’s -- it’s normal, the father is on the road, he’s working, and then of course, his family, his father was sort of like I don’t know what, religious in the synagogue, something or something. And my sister married a Christian man, wonderful fellow who had a furniture factory up in that particular place, refinishing antiques and all that, it was marvelous. He had two children, a daughter and a son. The reason I say daughter first is because she was the oldest, the son was second. And well, when we went -- went visiting once in awhile, he took us out early in the morning in the woods so we could see the deers. You know, and it was bu -- beautiful scenery, you know.
Q: And who is this, one of your mother’s sister, who married this guy?
A: Beg pardon?
Q: Who -- who are you talking about now? The --
A: My -- my fa -- my father’s sister.
Q: Your father’s sister?
A: Yeah.
Q: I see. And what was your mother’s name?
A: Martha Koppel, K-o-p-p-e-l.
Q: So did she -- did you have maids in the house, did she take care of you? You did have maids. So you -- was --
A: Well -- well -- ha -- ha -- haf -- th-things were going quite well, we had a sleep-in maid, so when my parents wanted to go out, the maid stayed with us --
Q: Right.
A: -- you know, and things like that.
Q: Was your mother a cook?
A: Y-Yes, yes, as a matter of fact, when they left Germany and went to France, and after than when they came to the United States, she was a -- I wouldn’t call it co -- you know, there’s cooks -- cooks, and then there is chefs.
Q: Mm-hm.
A: No, she was a gourmet chef.
Q: Really?
A: Oh, the same way -- we are not talking about oh -- I wouldn’t insult my wife by calling her a cook, she was a chef, because what she could do without fat, cooking and baking, was mind boggling.
Q: Mm-hm.
A: Or let’s say minimum of fat. My mother loved -- she made the most marvelous cakes and whatnot, but if a quarter pound of butter is good, half a pound of butter is better.
Q: Right.
A: And six eggs -- six eggs would just barely cut it. So obviously it had to be perfect.
Q: Right.
A: Taste-wise.
Q: Do you -- do you remember her food as a -- as a child?
A: Of course.
Q: So she cooked a lot when you were a kid?
A: Yes, yes, no, she -- she cooked. I mean, even when we had maids, I -- I di -- I was small when we had maids, you know, and I don’t remember at that time what she was doing. But later on, I mean, in -- in Germany, I remember later on when she was cooking, when we didn't have a maid any more. And then in France, of course, and then of course when they came to the United States, mind boggl -- it’s li -- France was very bad because starting in 1940 when the Germans overran France, until the end of the war, they plundered France with efficiency unparalleled in the history. There wasn’t a thing to be had for the French [indecipherable]. And then the French -- I came here in ’48, in ’48 I still haven’t seen white bread in France. And it was still rationed, there was nothing to eat.
Q: Mm-hm.
A: And I -- I wasn’t exactly a heavyweight when I came over --
Q: Right, right.
A: -- you know [indecipherable]
Q: Tell me about your youngest brother, Harry.
A: Harry?
Q: What was it like for you when he was born? Was this a great thing for you, or wou -- did you feel invaded?
A: I -- I loved my brother because he was my brother. On the other hand, he was not as affectionate as I was. I’m a loving, touchy, feely type guy. He’s not, you know? So everybody is different, you know? And he is more of a scientif -- scientist, you know? When he came over here, he went to college. He’s a little younger, a year and a half, and he became a physicist, and with a lot of degrees and things like that. And he thinks like a physicist.
Q: What was he like when he was a kid, when -- when -- when you were growing up together?
A: Well --
Q: Before -- before France now, before --
A: Oh yeah, yeah, I remember that. He used to be, shall we say, a shade abrasive, and he wasn’t all that tall, so I used to have to fight his fights for him. I didn't want anybody beating up my little brother, hm? Not that he remembers that, but I do.
Q: Was he more like your mother --
A: No, no, no, no.
Q: -- or your father? Was he more like your father, you think?
A: Not even.
Q: Not even that. So he --
A: Not even. He was -- he was his own person.
Q: Right.
A: You know. My mother was very loving, my father, in his own way was very loving, you know.
Q: Mm.
A: And warm. Of course I can’t say anything that my brother isn’t that way, but he doesn’t sh -- show it --
Q: Uh-huh.
A: -- you know, physically.
Q: Right.
A: You know.
Q: Right.
A: So everybody’s different.
Q: Yes. Did you like school?
A: I don’t know. I went to school because I had to. I mean, it’s as simple as all that. In Germany you do what you’re told.
Q: Right.
A: End of discussion.
Q: But -- but di -- did you happen to like it? Or you don’t even remember?
A: Oh, I went to school because that’s something you had to do. I have no likes for it. As a matter of fact, when I was nine years old, my father send me to the local gymnasium, and you know, they have uniforms there, the caps, the whole mcgilly, you know, everything. And what was our language? I’m nine years old, remember that. Latin. Well no, try as I might, there was no way wa -- that I was going to go cut -- cut it in Latin. So after six months my father took me out, put me in another one where the language was French like I mentioned before, so that was piece of cake.
Q: Right. You were supposed to speak Latin? Or just read it?
A: No, the whole thing --
Q: You -- you’re supposed to speak --
A: -- the whole thing.
Q: Really?
A: Not just reading, understanding, spelling and talking.
Q: And did Harry go to that school?
A: No, no, no.
Q: He didn’t.
A: Harry was a year and a half younger.
Q: Right.
A: So henceforth, by that time -- you see, Hitler came into power and we went -- we had to leave -- you see, in Germany when I went to -- what do you call that, grammar school I would say?
Q: Mm-hm.
A: Well, they didn’t make a-any differentiation. There wasn’t that much antici -- anti-Semitism in Germany in spite of what people will say. We went to school, school had catechism, so I sat in with the Christian children and I got catechism. No big deal. I got my Jewish education after school, you know? Several days a week we went and we had Jewish education in a different place.
Q: Were your parents religious in any way?
A: Well yes, I mean, for the holidays yes, but when I went to my grandfather, very religious, Friday night synagogue, Saturday morning synagogue, Saturday afternoon or evening synagogue, right? Of course holidays obviously. And I got so good in Hebrew that at the ripe old age of -- by 11 I left Germany, so I had to be 10, and I was living with them because I couldn’t -- we weren’t allowed in a Christian school any more, so we went to the Jewish school that the rabbi was running in my grandfather’s town. I could conduct the service at 10 years old. There was some kids my age that were actually better than me yet.
Q: Mm-hm.
A: They rattled it off like machine gun. But the world has a way of changing, and we change with it.
Q: So you went to a Jewish school when you were 10, in 1932, not 1933? And that was because you had to do that?
A: Jew -- Jewish children were not allowed to go to a regular school with Christian children.
Q: In 1932?
A: ’32.
Q: Uh-huh.
A: I mean, I don’t know whatever the date is, April of ’33 Hitler came to power, whatnot. Yeah, but that was just on paper. He owned the place from 1930 or ’31 on.
Q: Mm-hm.
A: His goons were running everything. And believe me, the terror that they initiated in the population -- we’re talking Jews, you -- you have to live through it to understand the total feeling of terror, with the brownshirts, which was called the SA, sturm abteilung. Forget the SS, the SS is something totally different. And they were marching, had parades every Sunday, flags. Of course, you locked up your place and what not, and hoped that nothing bad would happen. But it was frightening, I’m telling you.
Q: So you were very frightened as a child?
A: Well, as a child you take everything in stride. The one thing that the Germans were fabulous on, they created those what you would call Hitler type songs with the very marshall type music, and that appeals to the masses. You -- you have [indecipherable] every country has their own type of marshall music. The Germans are the best. The French are not bad. The United States is so-so, because we’re not really all that marshall. You know, we have a few songs. The Marines, you know. A-And -- and -- and [indecipherable] the Navy, Air Force, but it’s not really -- but the Germans, I mean, they have th -- a song for every occasion, or a march. And I’m telling you, there was one song I remember, and it’s [speaks German here]. Translation - when blood -- when the Jewish blood spurts from the knife, then things will be twice as good. So that’s was a -- wa -- one of the lyrics in the songs. I don’t know where people know these things. These are minor details.
Q: Do you remember hearing that song as a kid?
A: Of course. How -- why -- why would I remember it to this day?
Q: And who -- who sang it -- when -- do you remember when you heard it?
A: The -- the SA troops marching in the streets.
Q: And they sang?
A: And on the radio, and wherever you went that -- and they had more, you know, that’s just one, that’s the most bloody of them. Hate the Juden [speaks German]. I mean, hang the Jews, kill the bosses, or something like that, I mean like that’s the most marvelous songs. I mean horrible, horrifying. If you were a Jew, and you understood this, the terror was unbelievable. And it didn’t matter, because he appealed -- first of all, the mistake was made in the tret -- Treaty of Versailles, where they made Germany pay unbelievable reparations that they couldn’t handle, and Germany was really in a bad way. So, lot of people out of work and things like that, people wound up in prison, Hitler saw his chance. He took the worst elements out of prison, the people out of work, hung a beautiful uniform on them, nice jack boots, nice cap. [indecipherable] and everything, had them marching. Tried to get them job, oh, whatever you take away from the Jews, you know, all right? So, th-th-these weren’t the nicest people in the world that were enrolled in those troops, I can’t call them strup -- storm troops, even though it says sturm abteilung, right? Sturm means storm, you know, but that’s not the -- the SS is like I said, something totally apart. But they weren’t nice people. The head man was Mr. Worm, and he was also a very disreputable character, you know, out of prison, and all kinds of quirks shall we say. So, it was horrible.
Q: Did it surprise you that there was so much anti-Semitism? You say you didn’t grow up with a lot of anti-Semitism.
A: No. Was --
Q: It didn’t sur -- it didn’t surprise you?
A: You see my father, the last free election, he volunteered for the election board.
Q: Mm.
A: You know, because there was other people running than Hitler. And already at that time it was a losing proposition because Hitler promised all kinds of things to the masses, which he actually implemented eventually, which the other people didn’t have the nerve to come up with things like that. So, you know, that’s why I say, hit -- Hitler ran the show way before he was elected.
Q: But let me ask you something, Kurt, you’re a child.
A: Yeah.
Q: You’re 10 years old in 1932.
A: Yeah.
Q: So there’s a lot you don’t know, or necessarily understand.
A: Exactly.
Q: What’s -- what’s happening between you and your friends? Do your Christian friends stop being friends with you? Do you live in a neighborhood where it’s mixed? What’s -- what goes on with you as a child?
A: Well, when I went to my -- wh-when I couldn’t go to Christian school any more, regular school, and my next door neighbor, I used to be friends with the boy, he was a little bit older than me. I don’t know whether he stopped being friends with me, I’m -- I really don’t know for sure. But then I associated with all the children that went to the Jewish school that were in my grade, boys and girls, and things like that. So I did not associate with Christian children any more.
Q: So no one said something to you? No -- no -- somebody was [indecipherable]
A: No remarks were made, no.
Q: Right.
A: No, no.
Q: Right. Now, when was the decision made, and were you involved in a discussion about -- you were leaving to go to France? You were just told you were going to go? Did you not want to do it, or did you think that this was exciting?
A: Remember, in Germany you do what you’re told, okay? As much as you’re being loved, you feel that that is the right thing, if your parents -- if your parents, your father, your mother tell you, look, you’re going to France to Uncle Pierre and Aunt Emma, you know, because things here -- well, I realized how f -- how bad things were. So my father was smart enough, the oldest son, he got se -- out of Germany first. It was on my 11th birthday, basically. And I got on the railroad, on -- my aunt must have picked me up in Paris and we lived in Rennes at the time.
Q: So this is August of 1933?
A: Yeah, August 17th, 1933, I left Germany.
Q: So that --
A: Was a week after my 11th birthday. And then I went to live with my aunt and uncle. My -- my uncle was a French career officer.
Q: Mm-hm.
A: He was a doctor, right? And he met my Aunt Emma during the occupation of first -- of the first World War. After the first World War, he was sent -- French troops were occupying the Rhineland with the British. And he met my aunt in Germany, in her hometown, and they hit it off somehow. And then of course, an officer is called to duty wherever it’s called, so then he went to the Middle East, and he went to the bak -- Balkans, and things like that. So they got married in 1930 in our -- in our apartment in Cologne, they have a very large house. I mean house, a very large apartment.
Q: Mm-hm.
A: Actually, we had -- which was totally unheard of at the time, we had a bathroom like in the United States where the bath and the toilet and the sinks, everything is in one, and then we had a separate toilet. And we had two entrances, one for the servers and one for the regular people. So it was quite large, and I remember the wedding quite well. And they got married by us, you know, was [indecipherable] his family couldn’t be there, was in Germany, his fra -- fa -- parents, his brother lived in France. So anyway, so they got married there, this I remember, henceforth -- and then she left with him to live wherever he was stationed, which was Rennes. And that’s where I went.
Q: Okay, we have to stop the tape and change it.
End of Tape One
Beginning Tape Two
Q: Kurt, so you knew your aunt and uncle when you -- before you went to see them?
A: Oh yes.
Q: Were they older than your mother and father, much older, or --
A: My aunt was two to four years older than my mother. I think two years, maybe.
Q: But na -- so there wasn’t a big difference?
A: No, no. She -- there -- she -- she looked pretty much -- they looked pretty much alike, my aunt -- the one that I went to, and my mother. And -- and my uncle was born in ’89, so by that time it -- no -- yeah, ’89 -- ’89, it was ’33, so what was he? 11 and 33 is 44 years old.
Q: Right, so he was a bit older. They didn’t have children?
A: No, obviously that --
Q: Right.
A: -- helped a lot. And he was like a second father to me, he was wonderful.
Q: Really?
A: He just -- they took me to their heart. Now, my aunt of course, that’s family. But he a stranger. That’s very -- the most wonderful man I ever met.
Q: So he touched you a lot. He [indecipherable] you.
A: Oh [indecipherable] fantastic.
Q: Yes.
A: Fantastic, I mean, you know. And I lived with them for five years.
Q: Right. That’s a long time.
A: Passed by very quickly.
Q: Right. But it was good for you there?
A: Oh, fantastic.
Q: And you went to school?
A: Yeah, there I went through what they call in France this -- are we taping?
Q: Yeah.
A: In France they call it lycée, in Germany it’s gymnasium.
Q: Right.
A: Okay? So they put me in this sixth degree. You come s -- like I say again, you start like in grammar school, and you wind up, you know, with your baccalaureate.
Q: Right.
A: So they put me back one year due to the language, but within three months I rattled off French, with the proper accent and things like that. Well, I was only 11, so you catch on real quick. And as a matter of fact, even if I didn’t understand everything, I remember one day -- the education is a little different in France than it is here. It’s mainly the arts and history and such, not how to make a dollar. Over here it’s much more sensible. They teach you economics and things like that. In France, no. Ancient history and things like that. Some poetry. So I remember Aesop’s Fables, they were all translated into French in a big book by Mr. LaFountaine and they were pretty strict in school, so we have to learn a fable per session, whatever it was. So I rehearse with my uncle. So I rattled off that whole fable, perfect intonation, stop, go, whatever. My en -- my uncle looked at me and he said, do you know what you say? I says no. It was so perfect, but I didn't know what I -- what I really was saying, you know? The thi -- that’s when you’re a child, you mimic anything, and I did fantastic. Of course, later on I have to [indecipherable] same thing with mathematics. They used to throw numbers at you, multipliclati -- multiplication, addition, substraction, a teacher went like this, like that, picked you and you better be on the ball. There was no missing. That’s how come you didn’t need a calculator at the time. You know what I’m saying?
Q: Right.
A: You really knew how to calculate in your head. That -- these are the things that were important there.
Q: Now your parents and brother came to Paris in 1934, a year after you?
A: After me.
Q: Right.
A: But it took that long for my father to get all the permits, and to -- he was still able at the time to take all the furniture and everything that they had out of Germany, plus his money.
Q: Still he could take his money?
A: Yeah. I don’t know how he did that, that was a serious piece of change. And then he went to Paris, but of course, the French had accepted a lot of German Jewish refugees, also Polish for that matter. And -- but the only thing, there were restrictions. You could not start a job in a factory or anything like that. You had to start a business as it would be. So my father opened up a meat cutting -- meat packing business, you know?
Q: That’s very different from what he was doing in Germany, yeah?
A: Absolutely. The thing was, some of my mother’s relative’s children, they were butchers. So he had two or three of them that did the work. My father was a businessman, he knew how to run a business, and he’s the one with the money, so he bought or rented the building, he bought the trucks, he bought the machinery and he did the advertising. So it was hard -- you got to understand, France is a very culinary country. So to break in to the -- like what they call [indecipherable] which is the wurst, sausage business and ja -- ham and things like that, it’s not the easiest, so you have to really make a good product. But the Germans are fabulous when it comes to sausages and such. So the boys were good, they made inroads, slowly. The only thing wrong about the whole situation was there were young boys. In the early 30’s in France, ’34 - ’35 - ’36, everybody flocked to Paris. Americans, everybody, British, they loved it. [indecipherable]. So the boys discovered the races, they discovered the women, and they discovered gambling. Now, they were drawing a fairly decent salary, but that wasn’t enough for the lifestyle. So what they did, unbeknownst to my father, obviously, they looked at the delivery schedule for the -- today. So they filled the truck with all the stuff, and before the regular delivery boys could start, they went to the customers and sold the stuff at a little discount. So when the regular discount -- ah, the regular driver came along, sorry, you delivered this morning. So before my father found out, it was a little late. The business was shut there. So who was stuck with everything? My father had to pay off the machinery, had to pay off the trucks, have to pay off everything. So whatever money you have goes down the sewer. And the guys, couple of them, disappeared to the hospitality of countries such as Argentina. You know, a lot of these countries have been populated by people that weren't totally clean in their native country, okay?
Q: But this -- these were relatives?
A: No.
Q: Not these boys?
A: Only one of them was sort of like a relative.
Q: I see.
A: And he had nerve, what they call in Jewish chutzpah, unbelievable. He had his -- he had the nerve to come and had his clothes in my parent’s apartment and he used to come and visit occasionally, and my father wanted to kill him. And he would have been able to do it, physically. So my mother says, no [indecipherable]. So that’s how come he survived. Now I jump a little bit forward. The war is over, the guy is alive, he went back to Paris -- he was hiding in the south of France, he was -- went back to Paris, opened up the same business, and he had the nerve to use my father’s trade name for his own business. But being that nobody was cheating him, he went to be very, very successful. I met him after the war, also.
Q: Uh-huh. Did you -- when your -- your s -- you’re still living with your aunt and uncle for --
A: Yeah.
Q: -- for five years. You don’t go back to your parents until 1938.
A: Ah, well --
Q: But you s -- but you see them?
A: -- we visited, she -- my mother came, and -- or I visited Paris, I mean.
Q: Right.
A: As a matter of fact, I remember I was a young kid, I was 11 - 12 years old, and my father -- I tell you, Paris was unbelievable, he used to take me to nightclubs where the White Russians, who fled the revolutions were dancing, the Cossacks and things like that, and the -- in France, it’s okay. Children 11 - 12 years old, it’s not a problem. So I went to all these places, you know? That’s when my father still was in business, you know?
Q: Right.
A: And then after the thing went, shall we say south, I have to use euphemisms, he had a magnificent apartment in Paris. I think it was -- I -- I don’t remember the exact name, it doesn’t matter. Fantastic, maybe seven rooms and things. Concierge, elevators, the whole bit. Couldn’t carry that one any more.
Q: Right.
A: So we had to entrench somewhat. Not that it was bad, we still had a concierge, and instead of seven rooms, we had now five rooms of -- you know, and things like that. So it wasn’t really all that bad, but then my father had to back to it -- to this -- his original business in Paris, you know.
Q: But he still made enough money so that you didn’t have to live in a terrible circumstance, is that right?
A: Oh, no [indecipherable]. Things were pretty decent. My father worked very hard, and my mother took a little job.
Q: Uh-huh.
A: You know, as a nanny to chi -- to -- to a child, you know?
Q: Right.
A: Very nice people. Jewish, of course. And so they made ends meet. And ma -- my mother, food-wise, was easy to get along with. If you give her a pound of chocolate today, that’s all she needed. Skinny like that.
Q: Yes. Right.
A: It’s genes. But sh-she knew si -- how to cook. I used to know how to cook, too. I remember when I went to Paris after, in 1937 to live with them, and my mother was working, my father was home, or came home. My brother was there. I used to make French fries. In French they have these special things, you know, like a container with a screen and the oil --
Q: Mm-hm.
A: -- and it bub -- and you know exactly when to throw the French fries -- the potatoes in, when they pop up to the surface, I remember, I -- I wasn’t -- I wasn’t exactly a -- you know [indecipherable] as it would be, so I --
Q: Right, right.
A: -- you know. So I -- and later on, as a matter of fact, I was but -- I went to school in Paris, and I used to iron. I was the -- I must have been a big 15 at the time, I used to iron my -- when my father came home, you know, we had this -- these two big suitcases where all the samples were in.
Q: Mm-hm.
A: And I used to refresh the -- like I say, the jabot, the lace creations, and I used to iron them. 15 years old. Think about that. Amaze.
Q: That’s pretty complicated.
A: So that’s -- I’m telling you, I -- I was quite talented.
Q: Right. When you moved back -- when -- when you moved back to your parent’s place --
A: Yeah.
Q: -- rather than visiting, did your brother stay there, or did he go now to the aunt and uncles?
A: N-No, he -- he switched over, he went --
Q: He switched over.
A: -- he went with my aunt and uncle. Well, it’s good for them to have a child, you know.
Q: Child, right, right.
A: Of course you --
Q: Was it easier for your parents also not to have two of you at home?
A: Yeah, yeah, well listen, he wasn’t making the money he was used to.
Q: Right.
A: You know, and my mother had to, you know, have a little job, so it was easier for them. Of course I think they -- they sent some money, minimal amounts, even while I was there, to my aunt and uncle --
Q: Right, right.
A: -- you know, so that it wasn’t total charity case, you know what I’m saying.
Q: Do you have any idea how much your parents missed having the two of you in the house? Cause it’s very different to have one child, rather than the two together.
A: No, no, no, it’s totally different, it’s totally different. I mean, my parents went through so much that they were very staunch and strong people of character. What is needed, has to be done. It’s no beating your breast and -- and -- and -- and -- and running to the shrink or anything like that, uh-uh. They were far stronger than that, you know?
Q: What -- you’re now a-at an age, by 1935, you’re not a child any more. You’re now --
A: Yeah.
Q: -- 13 years old.
A: Yeah.
Q: Do you get Bar Mitzvahed, by the way?
A: Oh yeah, yeah.
Q: In France?
A: Oh that -- that -- that’s the most amazing thing. I got Bar Mitvahs -- Bar Mitzvahed in Germany, my father’s hometown, with the rabbi.
Q: How [indecipherable]
A: We went back -- we went back to Germany, 1935.
Q: Really?
A: Honest. We managed. Just things are -- you -- you were still abe -- my aunt, my youngest aunt was still living in Germany. So was my oldest aunt, okay? And my grandfather still had his house. My aunt sort of like hat -- she had haberdashery, beautiful, you know my -- see, when -- it was customary when your daughters get married, to give them a dowry. Now, three of them were married. My youngest one -- aunt, was not. So instead of a dowry, he bought her a haberdashery. Really fine stuff. Really. And it was in the house, the bottom. Two show windows, central entrance, you know, the whole bit. She had decorators come and do the windows and whatnot. And I remember playing in there when I was a kid, I used to love it, you know, I -- on the holidays, you know, Christian holidays, people used to shop for shirts, hats, [indecipherable], ties. I used to lo -- pla -- love to play with the ties. I used to know how to present a tie, you know, with the knot and things like that. I was a kid, and the people loved to see me around there.
Q: Mm-hm.
A: So that part was okay. And so I went back, and of course I had to learn my Bar Mitzvah reading. I had at least a whole month to learn everything, not a year or two. And I went to the rabbi every day in the afternoon, when he had time.
Q: So you were in Germany for a month in 1935, or did you do this in --
A: Yeah. No, no, no, that was in Germany.
Q: Mm-hm.
A: We went to Germany a month before so that I could get the teaching to read the Torah. Which I had only one month, I mean, I tell you, I don’t know, I’m not stupid now, but I was pretty bright as a young man, or child, you know.
Q: Now your mother stayed in France.
A: No.
Q: She came too?
A: My mother went with me, sure.
Q: I see. So what was that like to be in Germany three years after hit -- or two years after Hitler takes over. Is it -- was it terrible?
A: I don’t remember, I didn’t -- I didn’t hang out too much. I went from my grandfather’s place to the rabbi’s place and back. And the synagogue was still standing and there was the Jewish school where we eventually went because there was a Jewish center, a magnificent gothic cathedral, I mean like -- a -- a synagogue, excuse me. I mean, whoa, fantastic. Of course it was Conservative with the mab -- women upstairs and the men downstairs, a separation, you know, with the pulpit, this, that, what, the Torah, it was magnificent. Oak -- oak things there for everybody who -- who bought a -- a seat there, you know, like put your stuff in, your tallis, your -- your -- your tefillis, you know, the whole thing. And the [indecipherable] it was beautiful. And then there was the Jewish center next door, and the bottom floor was the Jewish school where the rabbi taught the various grades of Jewish children, from the community, you know? I mean, it wasn’t a hundred children, you know what I’m saying, but they were -- ranged in age, let’s say, from -- from I -- argument-wise, from let’s say seven to 14 -15 maybe? I don’t know.
Q: Let me ask you something. You said earlier that your father had to give up his business in Germany --
A: Uh-huh.
Q: -- because Jews had to not have businesses. But you go back in 1935 and your aunt has a haberdashery and she’s Jewish. So how is that?
A: I -- this I can’t figure. I don’t know whether she’s -- I think she was still in business. It was different. My father had a different kind of business, I think. And they had signs -- I don’t even think that they had signs on the stores that said Juden, meaning Jews. You know, you were s -- not supposed to buy there. Of course, the business must have fallen off drastically. But there were some people that weren't so diehard, you know what I’m saying? In a small town everybody knows each other. It’s different than in the big city. You know?
Q: Mm-hm.
A: So henceforth -- the house was still -- my grandfather was still in the house. My grandmother had died in 19 -- no, I don’t know when she died. I want to say in -- I wa -- I think I was in Paris when my grandmother died. And then my grandfather died later, around ’39, and my aunt stayed with him, the single one, because she couldn’t abandon him, it -- she felt obligated.
Q: Mm-hm.
A: And then she managed, at the last minute, to get shipped to England. Of course, whatever she had, went. I mean, she couldn't take a nickel along.
Q: But she survived.
A: The store, the house, they took everything.
Q: Right. But she survived.
A: But sh-she managed to go -- to get to England.
Q: Right.
A: From there, eventually she -- during the war actually, she transferred from England to the United States.
Q: Now, are you hearing about things that are going on in Germany? I mean, you’re there for a month, and you say pretty much you don’t know what’s going on. When you go back to France, are -- are you reading the papers as a 13 - 14 year old kid, or you’re not?
A: Yeah, sort of. You -- a-and then you hear on the radio, when we -- the one thing I remember was [indecipherable] Olympics, you know, with Jesse Owens.
Q: In ’36?
A: ’36.
Q: Right.
A: And Hitler occupying the Rhineland. And we thought for sure they gonna cut him off at the pass.
Q: Who was going to cut him off?
A: The French, they had the --
Q: I see.
A: -- they had the biggest army in the world. Two million people [indecipherable] arms. All they had to do is move. They moved out of the Rhineland, they weren't supposed to occupy the Rhineland, Hitler moved into the Rhine -- this I remember, and my uncle, who was a military man, couldn’t understand that the politicians screw everything up, you know. Why they didn’t move? Go figure.
Q: So what did -- what did you all -- what were people talking about? Were you talking with adults or were you talking with kids about what -- what’s Germany going to do? Once they go into the Rhineland, do you now think they’re going to go someplace else, you think they’re going to stop?
A: No. No, no, no, no, that -- it was a shock, as it would be --
Q: Right.
A: -- already.
Q: Right.
A: So you know, you get shocked often enough, it doesn’t shock you any more.
Q: Right. So does going into Austria shock you? The Germans.
A: No, no, that --
Q: No.
A: -- that was anschluss.
Q: Right.
A: They’re German speaking people and they did [indecipherable] Austria and then a little bit tricky was Czechoslovak -- I think, was Czechoslovakia in 1938?
Q: It’s before. It’s before the anschluss.
A: 1938?
Q: Mm-hm.
A: And that was a bad one. And so by that time, he was getting stronger and stronger and stronger. He had Austria on his side, he owned all of Germany, now he had Czechoslovakia, hey, hey, hey, hey, we’re becoming a big power. And everybody loves it, nobody does anything to him. So Hitler gotta be the right man, right? If you’re German.
Q: Were you afraid?
A: No.
Q: You weren’t?
A: No.
Q: Because you didn’t think he was going to come west? You didn’t think --
