-TITLE- AGNIESKA BUDNA-WIDERSCHAL
-I_DATE- 7/5/87 -SOURCE- CHRISTIAN RESCUERS PROJECT
-RESTRICTIONS-
-SOUND_QUALITY- FAIR
-IMAGE_QUALITY- GOOD
-DURATION-
-LANGUAGES- ENGLISH
-KEY_SEGMENT-
-GEOGRAPHIC_NAME-
-PERSONAL_NAME-
-CORPORATE_NAME-
-KEY_WORDS-
-NOTES-
-CONTENTS-
00:34 Q. When were you born?
A. 1900. In a town in North Poland, near a place of summer.
Q. Big town or little town?
A. Little town, a lot of Jews. She had two sisters.
Q. Was she the eldest or youngest?
A. Younger one.
Q. What year was she born again?
A. 1900.
Q. Were they wealthy?
A. They were less than middle.
Q. What were her mother and father like? Were they giving people?
Did they help others?
A. Her mother was the kind of woman who wanted to help every time - give something to everyone.
Q. And father?
A. Same. They were very good people.
Q. Was there any anti-Semitism in her family or town?
01:55
A. In the family, never, of course in the town.
Q. When is the first time she can remember what was happening with the Nazis and the Jews?
A. Mom died when she was seven years. After with father she left little town and came to [Yedinya], a small town on the sea shore.
Q. She left with who? She was seven?
A. No, her mother died when she was six. She grew up a little and left this town and came to [Yedinya].
Q. Who did she grow up with?
A. When she was 11 her father died. An old relative took her together with herself to [Yedinya]. Before the war there were many young Jews in [Yedinya]. All the young Jews were sent to the center of Poland. In 1939, at the beginning of the war, Hitler threw out all the people also Jews and Polish people-citizens who lived there, he threw out because he wanted to make it only for German
people.
02:70 They send all of them when the German regime came. All of them they brought to [Cschtokova]-a big town near the center of Poland-put all in a big field and left there were to be killed-all Poles and
Jews.
Q. And she was one of them?
03:28
A. Yes. So they were there she thinks about two weeks. She doesn't remember exactly how much and then they allowed to go where they want. Many of them went to a town-[Chbletz]. She with some people she knows,went also to this town.
Q. The Jews were also allowed to go where they wanted?
A. It was still at the beginning. In the beginning, there was nothing to do. She went to work cleaning in an office.
Q. What did she do before the war?
03:90
A. She worked in an office of export. There worked also Jewish people. This time when she came to [Chbletz], she met up with this Jew and lived together with him. He had three brothers.
Q. She was living with this Jewish man?
A. Yes, and he had three brothers. Six people were in this place where she lived with her husband and friends. It was in the time of the war-she met a Jewish man and lived with him-six people under the steps there was a little place to keep them.
05:61 Before the ghetto she lived in a little place-she was a worker in an office with a German boss. When the ghetto closed-so they got workers of the office better places to live. So she bought a place on the third flight thatched roof-she took her husband there-this apartment was little one.
06:05 So when the ghetto closed-put husband in hiding place in her new apartment and she went to take the three others of his family out of the ghetto-how she took out she came in inside-took the three men-they put her under their arms and she played as a very drunk woman. But on the street there were Gestapo walking all the time to look for people. So they saw them going with a drunk woman they said,"Such a Polish swine" and so she took them home.
Q. In other words, the Germans said, "That's just like the Poles."
A. And so it was a reason for her to take them home.
06:46
Q. Was she very frightened?
A. Her husband's brother was taken to Treblinka on a train. He jumped off the train and came to the place near the house because his brother had told him if something happened they'd go to her apartment. At night he saw her coming out of the door-he came with strong will to door and said,"I want to go in, they are my brothers." So she said,"There is no brothers, what are you looking for? But he was strong and pushed in the door and then she understood it was true- they began to kiss one another she let him in. There was one brother that worked in a train station and as we know, the train station is more dangerous and most difficult place because there were many Gestapo and many people and so many Germans that no one had the courage to come a little nearer. She decided she had to go to get the one brother and take him out and bring him to her apartment. She decided when went it was very dangerous. She saw a German with a very big gun. He asked, "Do you know it is not allowed to go visit someone?" So she knew a little German to explain to him "Look, there is living my aunt and she is a dress maker and I want to know perhaps my dress is already finished. And I have to go to ask because I haven't any other choice to know. So please I believe you are a good man and perhaps as a good man you will allow me to go to look for this aunt to know about my dress.
So he said,"O.K., I will allow you. Please look out for yourself because another one cannot be a good man. There are many such German people- but from my side go over it, but others please look of yourself." Then he went away and she went away. She took the work factory materials-she saw many children working hard - she decided she had no choice - she took a pail and went to the field and cried, "Galitski, the Germans are looking for you, you are electrical-they need you,"she didn't know anything but she had no choice so she cried,"Galitski, come here!" When he heard this he
came.
It was a little after daylight so she took his hand and began to run in other position of all the lager. They ran away through the field to her apartment.
Q. Could she manage to feed all these people?
08:75 A. Her boss was very old. He decided she has to get the same (wages) as the Germans that worked there because the Germans work only in the office. So he said she really worked hard cleaning everything so nice- so therefore she got the same as the Germans.
Q. She didn't have children at the time did she?
A. No. She brought all these things-sugar, vodka, so she would sell these things to get other things. For vodka she could get anything.
Q. How long were they in this place?
A. 1942 until the end of the war.
Q. What was it like having all these people in such a little place?
A. With her husband together they built there on the roof one more wall. It was big enough for a person to stand in. There was a little door the same as the wall so that no one could see it was a door in a wall. They were not behind this door unless they felt is coming the danger. Her husband's brother was an electrician-they were on the third floor-in the door in the kitchen-in the hideaway in their apartment down under the table he put a little light- so when she heard someone coming upstairs to her she put the light on- if and when they saw this light then they knew that there was danger. They went under the wall and closed themselves.
Q. So it sounds like it was a good system, and they all survived?
They lived through the war?
A. All of them lived.
09:81
Q. What was it like? Was there any privacy? Was it very crowded?
Did they fight?
A. No, never quarreled. They lived very nice. They lived very
friendly.
Q. When she looks back at the time does it feel like a good time in
some way?
A. Not once is there speaking about this time. But as a matter of fact, it seems as if it went away.
Q. Does she herself think about this time very much?
10:15
A. No. She knew herself then it was terrible and dangerous. If she decided to help she had to do it without fear because they knew that also they were going to be killed at the end of it. So if she decided to help she had to do. She was living in this apartment as one person and she bought this apartment as one person. So they had to be careful when buying carts of food. They had to be careful of the neighbors. She needed not for one but for seven. So when she'd hear neighbors going to sleep she'd take a sack to buy a little more flour or something at the black market. The neighbors were so not good people that if they saw perhaps she's bringing something more they'd ask,"Who is that for?" So she always came upstairs in such a hurry with incredible fear. She had to have her head on to stay alive. From the market to her apartment it usually took five minutes. But one day it took her an hour because her legs were trembling so much. When she got home she found all six crying on the floor because they were sure it was that night they were to die. She told them, "Please come up and be alive not dead.
There was one toilet for the whole building. They had to go to the bathroom in a pail. She had to bring the pail down everyday.
Water was also not upstairs. They were allowed to bring two pails of water upstairs everyday. Everyday after work she took two pails and in the evening before the night she took two more for seven people. She told the people she was a poor girl alone and wants to stay alive-she came from other places-she does the wash for other people. She bought two big, nice, fat rabbits. She had to buy more than one loaf of bread. If she knew the person in the bakery they would ask why she needed so many. Sometimes she would have to look everywhere for a bakery where she didn't know anyone. Her husband made her a basket, a big one so she put the bread on the inside and grass for the rabbits or wood for the ovens on the outside. As you know in Europe there are cold winters. During the winters there was nothing to eat, only vegetables-potatoes. Had to prepare more than was necessary-more than usual before the winter came. She got a big bag of potatoes-how to bring them because everyone thought she was alone. A man helped her bring the potatoes home. The neighbor saw and asked why she needed so many potatoes. She answered that her friend in the office asked to store her potatoes at her apartment because she did not have enough room in her own apartment.
Q. What happened to her husband after the war?
A. He wants to say later. The neighbor from downstairs came to her with a proposition. She said there was a little place in the roof in which Jews used to live. She was convinced where the Jews had hid were hidden treasures like jewels. She wanted to look for the treasures. She was so scared, she said,"I'm too tired after work to do that." She said," You can't say Germans won't stay here, can't say the Germans won't win the war. When the Germans will stay in town then we'll make it 50/50.
Once in one night, it can be perhaps at two or three o'clock, suddenly there was a knock outside. All the people took things and went to hide behind the wall. The person asked, "Who's living here?" She opened the door and said "I'm living here, I am a girl from Yedinya living alone." He asked,"Where are working in the German office?" She showed him where she was working. She told all the stories that she was a poor girl and everything. He believed she was just a poor girl and went
away.
Q. Was she religious at this time? Was her family?
A. She and her parents were very religious. She believes in
one god.
Q. Are they Catholic?
A. Yes, of course.
Q. What did this time teach her?
A. She had many Jewish friends. In the war time she was poor.
She did for people what she could. If she could do more she
would do more. .
Q. What happened after the war?
A. She was pregnant after the war and her husband ran a sugar business. Her child was born in September of 1945. She left town and went back to [Yedinya].
Q. Are there still brothers?
A. The brothers of her husband were born in [Czensk] so they stayed there. One of them came here and then went to Canada.
One of the brothers went to the army and then came here. Two sisters and one brother ran away to Russia. They stayed alive and came back to Poland. When they came back to Poland they were told about her. They found her alone because the brother had already died. It was a time when all Jews were looking for ways to leave Poland.
Q. How did she decide to come here?
A. Her child was ill and she couldn't find any doctors so she came here in search of good medicine.
Q. What happened to her family?
A. While she worked her family went to another place. She went to find medicine for the baby. She worked at the same supermarket as her husband. He didn't want any other girl besides her. She was a very nice girl. The child was already a nine year old girl.
Q. When did they come here?
A. 1958
Q. Did they have other children?
A. No
Q. Where is the girl her daughter?
A. In 1954 she was just nine years old and she went to Polish school. There began a wealth of anti-semitism. Everyone knew she was a Jewish girl. One day some children took her to the train station. They hid against the wall and pushed her to the side of the train when it came by. She was killed. The mother of the 13 year old who pushed her was at the funeral and said, "You know it's a good thing that our children are alive."
Q. What happened to the 13 year old girl's family?
A. One of them stayed in the same town. One went to France.
The third one came here. The sisters are living here. The children are living in Jerusalem.
Q. Are they glad they came to Israel?
A. She's very happy in a little place. Her one wish is for her husband to be healthy. The best thing for her is to make him healthy. It is time that no one will feel that feeling again.
Q. How would she like children to know about it?
A. Children will every time remember this time. In every holiday-joyous or sad. They will remember all the time what happened.Today she says it happened so many terrible things.
She can't be so strong today to save all those lives-she doesn't have as much strength as before.
Q. Is there anything else she'd like to add?
A. Every time when she can she will help. Every night after the war people were afraid to go out she was always the first to go look what happened. She was the bravest.
. END.
