United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Saul Merin
April 19, 2009
RG-50.030*0539
PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a recorded interview with Saul Merin, conducted by Ina Navazelskis on April 19, 2009 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
SAUL MERINPRIVATE
April 19, 2009
Question: Good morning.
Answer: Good morning to you.
Q: This is a United States Holocaust Memorial Museum interview with Professor Saul Merin, on April 19th, 2009. We are very, very pleased that you have agreed to come and speak with us today. The interview is about your life story, and we’ll start, as we always do, at the beginning. Can you tell us some details about your birth, about your family, about the world that you were born into?
A: And, thank you very much. I-I was born in a township, what they called shtetl, the small towns where most Jewish people lived in Eastern Europe. This township was called Bendzin. It had a – between 50 and 60,000 people – population. And it was similar to so many other places like this. It was in southwest Poland, very close to the German border, of more than maybe five miles.
Q: Was it a contested territory with Germany?
A: Yes, it was, always they were fighting about it. It was in Silesia, Silesia. Schilesia in – in German. And the Germans thought that this is their country. The Poles thought that this is their country. Before the war, all of Lower Silesia was next to Germany, and Upper Silesia, most of it belonged to Germany. A small part rem-remained Polish.
Q: In Bendzin, was it a multi-cultural town? Were there Germans living there, and Poles living there and Jews living there? A: That’s right, but really, the majority were Jewish people, in the town itself.
Q: How large was –
A: About 60 percent. About 60 percent of the people living in Bendzin were – were Jewish people. And they – their language mostly was Jewish.
Q: Yiddish.
A: Yiddish.
Q: Yiddish.
A: Was Yiddish. While a – in addition, they learned Polish, and knew Polish, but Yiddish was the major language. And there were people who lived there and spoke German.
Q: What about you?
A: We spoke Yiddish. And – at home, it was Yiddish. I knew, of course, very well, Polish. And I knew a little of German, not much. But I learned German during the war, and after the war, as a child.
Q: And how is it – how was the town’s structure in social classes, for example? Were – were Jews in a certain merchant class, or a certain class and Poles in another and Germans in another? How was that split up?
A: The whole town was poor. Poverty was probably the characteristic finding in town. Poverty among all classes. It was among Germans and among – among Poles, and among the Jewish people. The – the poverty was manifested by – by the houses, which were terrible dwellings. Many of them, there were no washrooms in the house, they have to go out to the courtyard. Sometimes this was seen even in – in houses which had four floors, and 20 - 30 families lived there. They had to go down and – life was not easy, not nice. Jewish people lived there probably for longer than many other places, because in Bendzin there was a castle, which was built by King Casimir. Casimir, or Kazimierz in Polish. Kazimierz the Great. He was the Polish king in the 14th century who united Poland. This is why they called him the Great. After he united it, usually by fighting, okay, in combat –
Q: Was that the Treaty of Lublin? Was he part –
A: No.
Q: No, okay.
A: No. This was – a-and he – he really thought – he ruled over Poland. This was unusual in Poland, because Poland was – the noblemen rule – ruled the country, not the king. But he was strong; he was the one who ruled at that time, in the 14th century, must have been about 1345. He invited the Jews of Germany to come over and live in Poland. And he promised that he will take care of it – of them, he will support them, and th – especially, he will be the one who will defend them, if there will be problems about – in – in Poland. The Jews heard it and they just couldn’t come at a better time for the Poles, and for the Jews, cause this was the time after the plague, after the plague, disease, the plague epidemic, the Black Plague. While the Germans, which – which maybe – nobody knows how much, but it probably was not less than a quarter of the – of European population who perished at that time from the disease, from the epidemic, and they possibly wa – it came up from 50 percent a – of the jew – of the European population. The plague was brought by an Italian ship from the east, from somewhere in the east. The story goes, in 1943, the – the ship came and they tried to disembark in Messina, in south [indecipherable]
Q: Not 1943, some pa – some other point, yes?
A: In 1343.
Q: ‘43.
A: 1343. And in Messina, the customs officer came on the ship and looked what kind of, how do you call it –
Q: Goods they had?
A: Goods, what kind of goods they brought with them. And then he has seen th-the sick sailors. He has seen this, he left the ship. He told them, you are not allowed to go to Messina, you must leave immediately the port. And they left and they went around into Venice. In Venice they disembarked.
Q: That was it.
A: Brought down the goods. And unfortunately, one of the problems was, later for the Jews, that one of the businessmen in Switzerland had a Jew for his assistant. And – sorry.
Q: It’s okay.
A: And he was sent to Venice to bring the goods. And he came over there and took the goods and came back to Switzerland. The goods were infected, like all of the goods which were [indecipherable]
Q: This is – excuse me for interrupting, but it’s interesting to hear history – first of all, I’ll back up a little bit. I have a theory, it’s a not very deep theory, it’s a little superficial, but I have a theory that east Europeans carry around their history for 600 years.
A: That’s right.
Q: Whereas Americans don’t remember what Vietnam War was: that’s already ancient history.
A: How right you are.
Q: And listening to you now, I hear an east European, because – because –
A: This was just 600 years –
Q: Yeah.
A: – from that time.
Q: And – and I’m wondering whether – whether these were stories and this was history that you grew up with in a – in order to explain how the Jews came to Bendzin, or is this –
A: Yes.
Q: – information that you learned later, history that you learned later?
A: No, it was – no, I th – I think I knew about it already as a child. I knew about it, because it’s very important for the life of Jewish people in Bendzin. You see, when the plague broke out, the Germans accused the Jews, that they brought in the plague, that they caused the plague, they caused the death of at least one-quarter of the European population, and thousands of Jews were massacred as a –
Q: Result.
A: – result of this. And when he invited the Jews to come, tens of thousands left Germany into Poland. Poland, til then, had one small community in Kalish(ph), a town more to the north [indecipherable]. And after this there were many communities which were put up.
Q: So you could sa – so one could say that Bendzin was one of the oldest Jewish communities in Poland.
A: Yes, that’s what I think, yes. This wa – this was what we knew about it. This was one of the oldest – because Jews settled near the king they loved. And –
Q: This is the other point I wanted to bring up, th – and again, excuse me for interrupting, but it sounds from what you’re saying, is that there are traces of a Polish patriot in you, in your telling, because of – now, I could be wrong, I’m – this is why I’m testing this out, because it sounds like the story was a favorable story to Poland, that it was a refuge, that it was a country where one could live. It was a country that offered survival and reprieve. And the reason I – I – I bring this up is that just recently there was a Professor Polonsky who was the chair of Judaic studies at Brandeis, gave a presentation where he said, until World War 2, many Jews believed that about Poland.
A: Yes.
Q: Many Jews believed that about where they lived. And so that’s why I’m asking you, is that –
A: Yes.
Q: – is there something to this?
