Note: The following is a set of time-coded notes that uses direct quotes and partial quotes from the interview. It is not a verbatim transcript.
-TITLE- ISRAEL ROSENWALD
-I_DATE- 12/4/83 -SOURCE- UCLA HOLOCAUST DOCUMENTATION ARCHIVES
-RESTRICTIONS-
-SOUND_QUALITY- EXCELLENT
-IMAGE_QUALITY- EXCELLENT
-DURATION-
-LANGUAGES-
-KEY_SEGMENT-
-GEOGRAPHIC_NAME-
-PERSONAL_NAME-
-CORPORATE_NAME-
-KEY_WORDS-
-NOTES-
-CONTENTS-
7:01:00 My name is Israel Rosenwald. I was born on May the 18th 1924 in a town which is named Piotrkow Trybunalski in Poland. It’s about 49 kilometers from Lodz. I was brought up in a family of three brothers and one sister. I'm the youngest of the brothers. We lived in an area which was one- hundred percent Christian within three or four blocks. We were the only Jews and my father had a grocery store. We lived a comfortable life. We attended private schools, religious schools, all of us. We were able to support the expense of private schools. I was brought up in a religious way of life, and when war broke out all of this was terminated. We were forced to move from that are into the Lodz Ghetto.
7:03:33 Before 1942, late 1941, they put me in a permanent place to work which was called Hutakara (sp) which was manufacturing plate glass. We were still going in groups to work from the Ghetto to place of work and from work to the Ghetto. . . . up until a certain point in 1942, where they took most of the people in the Ghetto. . . 22 to 24 thousand people and they kept us in place of work during the expulsion of all the Jews from the Lodz Ghetto.
7:05:28 One day they took him, my father, to clean the gas channels which was feeding the big ovens of the glass factory and to clean out those channels he stepped into hot ashes and burnt his legs. That means he was disabled and couldn't work anymore. He was of no use to the Germans and to the people which were running that factory. That means he stayed home till that action came to take out all these people from the big ghetto to Treblinka, to the gas chambers of course. Which we found out later about it.
7:07:39 We started planning how to get to the parents and it happened so that we were in a square called Platz Trebelnaski (sp). . . one side of the square was the German center and the next side was the building we lived. . .there was a question who should go and how to get there. So finally I came up with the idea I would go. . . I didn't think about the risk involved. . . we were counted on the way out and on the way in. . . I told my brothers the way I'm gone do it I'm gone go with the group, be the last one in the group or one of last and as we pass the building I'm going to jump from the group into the building. This is the way I was going to get in touch with my parents.
7:10:00 Instead of going to work I just jumped out of my group and got into the building. I was waiting for the next group which was returning from work and as the group passed by the building I jumped out and joined the group. 7 42 There were a lot of people in secret places like my parents they were hiding then they were joining the ghetto.
7:13:30 Then they shipped her out to Treblinka, and that was the end of my sister.
7:15:02 One day after I took out my sister from the hiding place that happened to them. That Willie and Jun Allevin (sp) came up to the attic and started talking in Jewish and said 'Jews if anybody's here now's the best time to get out' and of course the Jews heard some Jewish language so they answered. . . . They took them all out and put them in the
big synagogue.
7 :17: 03 We stumbled on people over people who were sneaking out of the temple and we couldn't find my parents or his sister so we started to go back to the small ghetto. As we came. . . the way we got out of the small ghetto was a water channel under a bridge we jumped into that water channel and as we got under that bridge there's a group of people. As we get close it's my parents and his sister. . . and we took them into the ghetto.
7 :19: 32 Interviewer: What about your brothers?
My younger brother was with me and my oldest brother working in the factory making tables.
7 :19: 50 One day when I came home from work I found they took my father away, they found him, my mother was hiding under the bed with logs in front of her and they didn't move the bed but my father was in the attic and they found him. .
they took him again to the synagogue.
7: 23: 05 Interviewer: You know that your father was shot?
Well, yes, we knew the following day that they were shot. . .
we were told by the Pollacks. . . they saw these things.
7: 26: 01 Now in September 44 we were all evacuated to Chanceduhullah (sp) . . . another town about sixty kilometers from Ladj. It was an army manufacturing place.
7: 27 :12 Now in January I think eleven or fourteen 1945 the Russians came in and we got liberated. As we got liberated everyone took off and went home. . . . We found my mother
there.
7:28:41 People recognized me, I'm Jewish, and they say "You still alive?" in other words they not happy to see me alive but they just wondering if any Jews left over. . . it looked like they are very upset about it that we're still alive.
7:31:17 Her grandparents used to have, used to be very well to do, they had a nice home, a little palace, and she went there. But the Pollacks around there hated to see her come back and take up the place again. So one night she was sitting, and a few other people were there, they were sitting in the kitchen and talking and a few bullets came through the window. Pollacks start shooting in, they were trying to kill her. She saw that so next day she came out and she came to the place where my mother started Jewish Community Center, so called, and she told her story. So my mother told her "look you not gone go there any more you come with me and we live closer by in town, we just live in an apartment and that's how I met my wife."
7:34:57 We left in 1951 (Bergen-Belsen) and we came to the
States in 1951.
7:38:09 The first time they took a friend of mine and he was cleaning out certain apartment and he came to a pair of socks and took it in his pocket and evidently that Willie happens to be there guarding them and he saw what he did. Al he did, he just approached him, took out his pistol and shot him right on sight. . . . just cause he stuck a pair of socks in
his pocket.
7:41:43 I was young but I was strong and I didn't mind work as long as I could get something to eat. Work was nothing to us. I guess anybody work was nothing really as long as you were fed or had enough to eat. Work would mean nothing.
7:45:40 Interviewer: You said you prayed. Did you mean
literally?
Well within our mind, no, I didn't pray then anymore. No I didn't although I observed the Jewish tradition. At that time, say Yom Kippur, I never missed the fast, even in camp.
But as far as praying, up to the date where we got into camp, actually where we got out of this big ghetto, I prayed every
day.
7:47:50 Interviewer: What happened to your brother?
My brother, the middle brother, which worked with me got liberated too, the same time from Chezberun (sp). Now when we got back to town he was already twenty-one at that time.
7:54:31 Interviewer: How do you feel about having told the
story?
Well, I feel now a lot easier than I felt before I started the story. Like I said before I probably have willies tonight because of them but that's part of it and I guess it's going to stay with me the rest of my life and I'm glad I told the story because in the future if somebody wants to look back and see how their father did, the work he did, maybe he's told us most of it but not all of it and if there's something they can look back and find it here and they want to know about it there will be some evidence. And I'm very happy about it. It's been a pleasure.
. END.
