INTERVIEW WITH Walter Louis Gluckman Harry Gluckman
Alice Gluckrnan
INTERVIEWER tW11 CwLETrt
DATE VS
PLACE TRANSCRIBER Abigail M. Pearce RPR CM
MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN My name is Walter Louis Gluckman formerly GlIecksmann in Germaiy spelled
G-l--ie-c-k-s-m-a-double Born on the 7th of June 1904
10 in Breslau it was Silesia in Germany.
11
MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN And Ivm Harry Gluckman.
12 was born in October 1929 in Berlin
13 THE INTERVIEWER Aliright. Well can you --
14
inaudible.
15 MRS LICE GLUCKMAN was born in Breslau
16 Germany on March the 3rd 1908 Alice Gluckrnan.
17 THE INTERVIEWER What was your maiden name
18 MRS. ALICE GLUCKMAN Barber B-a-r-b-e-r.
19 THE INTERVIEWER All right. Mrs. Barber can
20 you tell me little bit about your life before the Nazis
21 came to power in Germany Canyoutll me little bit
22 about what itwa like
23 MRS ALICE GLUCKMAN We had -- well we moved around quite bit in Germany. The last we were in livin
25
Gluckman Family Stuttgart and we hada very pleasant life.
My husband was working and took care of my two children by the name now Harry and our daughter Marian who passed away about 18 years ago and left four children.
Theyre living now and we have very very pleasant days now in the free country of the United States of America.
THE INTERVIEWER Now before you were married can you tell me little bit about what you did and how your life was then 10 MRS. ALICE GLUCKMAN lived with my parents 11 in last in Berlin. have one sister and we were married 12 met my husband and Iwas 14 years o1d 13 THE INTERVIEWER You were very young.
14 MRS. ALICE GLUCKMAN And we had -- 15 MR. WALTER GLUCKNAN In Breslau.
16 MRS. ALICE GLUCKMAN In Breslau and we had
17
18 19 THE INTERVIEWER And what did your parents 20 what did your father do ALICE GLUCKNAN My father was an was one of the first ones that lost their 23 work and their job and whatever through the Nazis because he 24 could not work for the government anymore.
25 So he went they went my sister left us in
Gluckman FamiJy 1934 and went to Palestine.
And my parents left in 1936 and went to also
to Palestine.
THE INTERVIEWER Did they stay there long then MRS. ALICE GLUCKMAN They stayed there until my father passed away in 1942. And saw him the last time My mother lived until 1964 and visited her 10 on in 1960 for her 80th birthday.
11 THE INTERVIEWER When you say you had to -- you 12 went to Palestine you knew then 13 MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN couldnt hear you.
14 THE INTERVIEWER inaudible They will hear me 15 actually enough for transcribing purposes.
16 When did you.whendi.d you know that. you wete.
17 going to haze . to leave When was it -- what what was it 18 that that your family that you knew you had to leave 19 MRS. ALICE GLUCKMAN My husband lost his job 20. too and he couldnt work anymore. He worked through 21 Jewish committee carrying rocks and sand 22 THE INTERVIEWER When was that 23 MR HARRY GLUCKMAN Construction 24 MRS. ALICE GLUCKMAN Construction.
25 MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN In 1938.
Gluckman Family THE INTERVIEWER Go ahead. You try.
MR. WALTER GLUCIcMAN What mywife saidi want to complete little more because what she said -- she was born in Breslau but her parents moved 1926 with her 1926 with her sister and her to Berlin and was working for the same company in Breslau and in the factory there very close by they had different places. moved close to Hamburg and then from Hamburg over to Berlin where my wife and got married in 1928.
10 And there our sonHarry was born. And in 1932 11 my wife and moved with Harry formerly Heinz to Stuttgart 12 where was working for this same company with the name of 13 Schlasesch.iff von Nierverge Phonetic. That means veneer 14 in English. And was in charge of the business in South 15 Germany there target to visit customers and so on 16 And then Stuttgart in 1935 our daughter Marian
17 was born.
18 Marian was only three little over three 19 years old when we gave her away. That means she was the
20 first one 21 MR HARRY GLUCKMAN Wait irinute Gave her -- 22 what do you mean Lets clarify gave away In English it 23 doesnt come out quite the same Dad.
24 MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN No. We had to separate -- 25 let me say it this way we had to separate from her to save --
Gluckman Family to make beginning of saving some of the family from the Nazi persecution because of my wife mentioned already her father lost his job the first as an
THE INTERVIEWER Accountant.
MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN Accountant.
could work until 1938 till the company was pretty wellknown and the company in Germany was
MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN Taken over.
MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN No. Taken over you say -- 10 how did you say it dont know.
11 MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN Appropriated by 12 appropriated by the German government.
13 MR. WALTER
14 MR. HARRY
-- yeah.
Nazi party.
15 MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN Taken away from the 16 original owners as my father was one of the original owners 17 of the company.
18 THE INTERVIEWER Was it was it was it just 19 said it was because they were Jews and 20 MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN Sure. Sure on account 21 of like all Jews business had to give up and they were 22 taking away from the Jews.
23 And so lost my job too and as my wife 24 mentioned already of course already years ago we made tryings 25 to get out but we could not find any possible way.
Gluckman Family My wife and went in 1937 to at that time still Palestine to visit my wifes parents and her sister and we tried over there every possible way but there was no way because children could ask their parents to come over but not the other way around.
My parents-in-law could not get any way to get us over. So we had even planned if possible as many many Jews did to go the illegal way and try it before to save our children in sending them out with the socalled 10 children transports frOm Germany. And that was the first 11 way we were successful that family in England took over 12 to take our three and half year old girl Marian in their
13 home.
14 THE INTERVIEWER In England.
15 MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN In England in Sheffield 16 England. And -- 17 MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN And Im digging for 18 newspaper clipping which appeared at that time in the 19 Telegraph which was newspaper in Sheffield England which 20 might be of interest upon her arrival together with 21 guess several hundred Jewish children from Germany 22 THE INTERVIEWER What year was this Im
23 sorry.
24 MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN think the date is on the 25 paper July 13th 1939 is the date on the paper here.
Gluckman Family THE INTERVIEWER Mary Gluckman
MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN Yeah. Well this all
came THE INTERVIEWER Thats German.
MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN Yeah
THE INTERVIEWER Yeah.
MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN dont imagine either of
you reads that.
MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN This family is lady we 10 never met but calls 11 MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN Let me let me interrupt 12 for second Dad because since you brought this out 13 it might be of interest.
14 You can see it says Sheffield Coordinating 15 Committee for Refugees and its written on behalf of the 16 Lord Bishop. of Sheffield. And it is -- it says Dear Mrs.
17 Gluecksmann and it says that can report to you that 18 your daughter Marian has arrived and has arrived and has 19 been placed with these people Theyre very good kind 20 people She will have wonderful life. In other words
21 trying to 22 MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN Console.
23 MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN Rest rest at ease and 24 console the parents who may or may not ever see their
. .
25 daughter again.
Gluclcman Family THE INTERVIEWER Mr. Gluckman were you worried inaudible
MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN Yeah of course.
THE INTERVIEWER How did you think you ever were going to see your daughter again
MR. WALTERGLUCKMAN Yeah. . When she left put little note in her suitcase what was saying Dear Mr. or Mrs. So and so because we didnt know any name Please do us favor and let us hear as soon as possible that. --- our 10 little girl was all our sunshine arrives and let me know 11 that she is well taken care of.
12 And this lady what my son just translated the 13 letter from the German it is written 14 MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN Shes secretary of the 15 Sheffield Refugee Childrens Committee 16 Interesting she writes P. S. in English 17 dont know if you knew that. We shall meet little Marian 18 in London today and we will write to you each week about her.
19 Which guess they continued to do until comrunications were
20 cut off.
21 MR WLTER GLUCKMAN Of course the mail 22 in the meantime by war was interrupted te couldnt get 23 anythinq We found relatives in Holland They tried to qive 24 us and send our mail to there so let me inaudible 25 MR. HARRY GLIJCKMAN Let me add here as said
Gluckman Family this newspaper clipping indicates July 1939. It was not too long after that that Germany attacked Poland and Britain had declared war on Germany.
MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN Of course that was the beginning of our save to save some of the family and we have even notes and letters from the lady as she tried very hard also to get our son over. It would have maybe been possible month or two later.
But in the meantime we have tried to arrange 10 everything possible to get out ourselves and we found what 11 will explain later maybe to you funny or strange way to 12 get an affidavit in America and to find way to get here.
13 We didnt get any other possibility.
14 THE INTERVIEWER Mrs. Gluckman when you sent 15 Marian and packed her suitcase and kissed her goodbye well 16 what was what was what you were thinking Can you tell us 17 All right. Well you must have been very 18 worried for your son.
19 MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN think it was the worst 20 day of our lives when we put her into the train as you can 21 imagine. Not even four yet three and half years old.
22 When wesaid goodbye we didnt know if we would 23 ever see her again.
24 THE INTERVIEWER My question is why did you 25 have to split the family up Why did you have to --
Gluckman Family 10 MRS. GLUCKMAN Save the children.
THE INTERVIEWER You knew already that you -- MRS. GLUCKMAJ Yes.
THE INTERVIEWER needed -- MRS. GLUCKMAN Yes.
THE INTERVIEWER And that was one reason you
wanted to MRS. GLUCKNAN Yeah. We wanted to get the children out and have them safe. What happened to us we 10 had our life before so we were not too worried but we were 11 trying to go illegal and we could not take those small 12 children. He was nine or ten years old and the little girl 15 MR. HARRY GLUCKNAN Let me add something here 16 because think anyone who who hears this has to understand 17 clearly why people were not getting out -- because of the
18 Catch-22 situation.
19 And think it has to be understood that the 20 Germans in their clearly diabolical way wanted the Jews out 21 but didnt it was go but dont go and thereby there was
22 number system.
23 think what also has to be understood what 24 hasnt been said in the United States often enough is that 25 the major criminals in Germany at that time were the
Gluckman Family 11 American consuls who were dealing in Jews were dealing the American consul in Stuttgart who was an appointee of Franklin Roosevelt became one of the wealthiest men in all of Europe as result of this. And think thats what needs to be said here. It was said in some of the later things that were written about Roosevelts time.
Therefore if you had very hicth number -- it was lottery you had high high number that you drew where your time would come up to apply and to possibly be 10 allowed to leave there was no hope. And consequently 11 people were dealing in these numbers. If you had very low 12 number well you were going to go and your chances of 13 getting out were good.
14 THE INTERVIEWER Now youre talking about -- 15 what time period are you talking about 16 MR. HARRY GLUCKNAN From 1936 until the gates 17 slammed shut in 1940 or thereabouts.
18 mean well come to that later but we were 19 amongst the last that were. able to get out in quasai legal
20 way.
you backtrack and tell
Yeah.
little bit how their 25 parents got out with this baby
Gluckxnan Family 12 SECOND INTERVIEWER Yes thats very interesting how they got out.
MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN Well that think my mother and father will have to do.
MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN Let me.
MRS. GLUCKMN Let him talk. Let him talk.
MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN We tried very hard to find way as mentioned before. Just more or less by coincidence we found Gluecksmann in New York who was 10 willing to give the affidavit as you know kind enough 11 to take the responsibility to do this.
12 THE INTERVIEWER How did you find this
13 Gluecksmann 21 its characteristic of the desperation at that time to do
Ui 22 almost anything to get out because it meant you didnt get 23 out unless someone in this country was willing to give an 24 affidavit and vouch for you as it still exists today.
25 And most people wanted another affidavit under
Gluckman Family 13 the table that that released them from the legal document which is also true in our case.
But- THE INTERVIEWER Thats fine. Inaudible
MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN We wont mention the names but my father through friend who had immigrated earlier with whom he played cards in Germany was able to search the telephone directory in the community where he was living for name that appeared to be similar similar enough to have 10 been changed with the umlaut dropped and that sort of thing.
11 And there are many versions of our name.
12 Is there something wrong with that Im not 13 going to identify the party probably hes been dead for many 14 years in any ase but okay.
15 He was willing to give -- 16 MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN No it was little 17 different. We ourselves my father tried very hard to help 18 us out as we tried even our children out 19 ITy father and divided the number of 20 Gluecksmanns we found in the telephone book from New York 21 and the book led us to think about 30 or 4Opeople. On 22 these letters we only got two answers two Gluecksmanns 23 answered and showed certain interestand what my son 24 just mentioned one friend who immigrated before us from 25 Stuttgart went after them and he found one willing to give
Gluckman Family 14 the affidavit to help us out.
And from this point on we found legal way what my son mentioned by the American consul to get the paper little by little. First we got the number -- THE INTERVIEWER When did that happen it was 40 already or end of 1939.
GLUCKMAN 12 got the number from the consul and the numbers were very very 13 wide open you know until we got it it was beginning of
14 1940.
15 As my wife said in the meantime was ordered 16 by the government to the Jews organization to work on street
17 street 18 MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN Construction project.
19 MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN Construction project.
20 And so if wouldnt have gone probably they 21 would have put me in concentration camp or so 22 But this was all before what didnt mention 23 or.what we had not mentioned at all yet that was lucky 24 enough not to be called to concentration camp because once 25 when the Nazis came it was in the famous Kristal Night.
Gluckman Family 15
MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN November 38.
MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN And even second time -- THE INTERVIEWER You were in the Kristallnacht. Can you tell us little bit about it
MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN Oh yes. Only too well reiuember because when the Nazis came in the front of the house jumped out of the window in the back and this probably saved my life.
And by the secondtime when they came looking 10 for the Jews my father who still lived with my mother in 11 Breslau even came by train from Ereslau to us in Stuttgart 12 but we were living in another house with friends not to be 13 caught. So -- 14 THE INTERVIEWER Non-Jewish friends or Jewish 15 MR HAPRY GLUCKNAN Jewish friends where the 16 husband had already been taken away to concentration camp 17 so there was some feeling that they wouldnt come back to
18 that place.
19 THE INTERVIEWER At the time.
20 MR. HARRY GLUCKNAN At that time.
21 MR WALTER GLUCKMAN So one has nothing to do 22 with the other.
23 Of course going back further this hour 24 didnt want to be too too long.
25 MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN No thatts what were here
Gluckman Family 16 for but were -- while were on the subject of Kristal Night lets talk about that for just second because have recollection that Ive never shared with anyone and think it might might well be on the tape.
And you mentioned what you did. Maybe you ought to take break and let me talk for just minute.
remember and Ive written about so its very clear in my mind.
As small boy and very impressionable boy 10 came out of the house that that day.
11 MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN In Stuttgart.
12 MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN Stuttgart being very much 13 like San Francisco city of hills we lived reasonably high 14 up on the side of hill.
15 And when came out of the house and was 16 waiting for friend to go to school with me guess have 17 to say first that this being after the Nuremburg laws Jews 18 were not allowed to go to public schools so Jewish school 19 was created next door to the synagogue as part of the Jewish 20 community and part of the synagogue.
21 THE INTERVIEWER Did you have religious
22 orthodox upbringing 23 MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN No. No not at all.
24 THE INTERVIEWER Was the school that you went 25 to then first kind of reaffirmation of the Jewishnes.s for
Gluckman Family 17 you Was it strange Was it
MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN had never known anything else so you know had not gone to anything other
than--
THE INTERVIEWER Inaudible.
MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN By the time started school by the time was of school age was 1936 or 1935 guess in other -- in any case it was after the Nuremburg laws and that was the the year that started school was
go to public 12 So from the time started school in Stuttgart 13 was at the Jewish school. It was called the Jewish School
14 of Stuttgart.
15 And the morning of the morning of Kristal 16 Night came out of the house. And as say we were up on 17 the hill so we could look doTn over the center of the city 18 which is where the synagogue and the school were.
19 And we saw flames and we saw smoke. And we 20 realized right away that it was the school and the synagogue.
21 And my friend and hopped on our bicycles 22 dont know if my parents ever knew that. But we went down 23 there and being curious little Jewish boys we we went 24 right on the street and we were right opposite the school and 25 the synagogueand we were there when they dragged our Rabbi
Gluckman Family 18 and Im having trouble saying this because was there when they brought out the Torah and set it on fire and held it up in the air and they marched around and paraded around the Rabbi and made him watch this this desecration of our our holy place and our holy document. Its something that one doesnt forget. Its sort of etched. Well Ill deal with the rest of it later.
THE INTERVIEWER Inaudible.
MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN Just 10 able to get home. We thought we could 11 as we were we could see quickly that it was not healthy 12 place to be so we got the hell out of there. think thats 13 the only way can say that.
14 Thats pretty much it. think just as an 15 addendum to that perhaps as returned to the street that 16 we were living on we came down the street on our bicycles 17 as the the open half tracks the army vehicles with the 18 soldiers on the back had rounded up some of the Jewish men 19 and they were sitting inside and were being taken away.
course our first feeling you dont You werent outside on the street 22 was outside on the street.
23 My father at that point was in hiding guess 24 in you went to the wobds. think we lived near the what 25 was called the West Bahn.hof the western railroad station in
Gluckman Family 19 the city and it was near the woods.
dont know if thats where you went. have no idea. Id like to --maybe Dad recalls. dont know.
In any case was out in the street with my friend. dont remember who that was. Do you remember Mom
MRS. GLUCKMAN No.
MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN Anyway friend with whom rode bicycle to school in the morning.
came down the street we saw the in their uniforms and they had taken 12 some of the Jews on the so you know we sized up the
13 situation.
14 And at that point some of my Christian 15 friends with whom played football or soccer came to me 16 and across the street the grocery store the bakery can 17 see it at the corner and they came and said This isnt 18 good place for you to be. think maybe -- and went in 19 one of their homes with them at their invitation because 20 they said that This is not good place for you to be 21 dont remember beyond that All remember 22 is that one of them was kind enough -- dont remember his 23 name or anything but he thought that this was not place 24 for Jewish boy to be and and -- yeah 25 THE INTERVIEWER Mr. Gluckman what are your
Gluckman Family 20
recollections MRS. GLUCKMAN We went to
MR. HARRY GLUCKNAN think we went to the
Einsteins yeah right.
MRS. GLUCKNAN Right away. We got call
from court.
MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN Was that inaudible MRS. GLUCKNAN And we went there and before we left we had call from your father from Breslau saying 10 arriving at this and the time.
11 MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN telegram yeah.
12 MRS. GLUCKMAN telegram or something or
13 call.
14 And we left the house and we went to friends 15 house who was picked up before from the Gestapo.
16 And we stayed there for at least two weeks 17 until it was safe had my beds open and had the coffee 18 pot on the table and thats the way we left the house.
19 MR WALTER GLUCKI4AN Thats the only time in 20 my life what can remember as long as we are married that 21 my wife left the coffee standing there and the beds not even
22 down.
23 THE INTERVIEWER Why were you in the woods 24 MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN Hiding that they couldnt 25 find me. But cannot make the difference anymore because it
Gluckman Family 21
was two years 3. were in the woods.
MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN Oh yeah. That was in 39.
MRS. GLUCKNAN Yeah.
MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN Okay. Please keep tIem on that side. Trying very hard to THE INTERVIEWER All this time when you were trying to get the children out you were trying to find ways 10 you could get out. You found Gluecksmanns in New York that 11 would help that would sign the affidavit. You came to
12 America then.
13 MR U2\LTER GLUCKrIAN No it was not so fast as 14 you sayand a.syou thinkiwas 15 THE INTERVIEWER And so tell me then how was
16 it. .
17 MR. WALTER GLUCKNAN Because to go on with my 18 long long story even dont remember asHarry. . must help 19 me what time it was It was still in 39 because Narian 20 left in 39. in July think 39 and came to Sheffield.
21 And this very nice Mrs.. Selaus Phonetic in Sheffield 22 helped us or wanted to help us to get Harry out too but she 23 was not successful anymore.
24 THE INTERVIEWER Inaudible.
25 MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN No you keep talking Dad.
Gluckman Family 22 He got little closer.
MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN And dont exactly remember the dates now and Harry said it might have come already into 1940 when we finally when finally our number or so to say due at the Consulate and we were invited to come thereand we get our American visa. .
.1 think it was in February 40 but even when we had the visa that was not enough because we didnt have any way to get out.
10 In the meantime think Harry mentioned this 11 before the war 12 MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN thought we had -- 13 thought you had passage booked on an Italian ship.
14 MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN No. No. No. We had no 15 book because there was no way anymore because the ar broke 16 out and even the last possibilities from Italy or from 8. 17 Poland were broke off. There did not go any ships anymore.
18 So now we finally we were so happy to have 19 visa and now we had not way to get out and were very 20 much. afraid and had to be very much afraid that the visa 21 expired because they were only dont know three or four
22 months.
23 MR. HARRY GLUCKNAN It did run out.
24 MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN And thedid run out and 25 we were very very lucky that we got them extended for
Gluckinan Family 23
second time.
In the meantime my father found way that was think the last given possibility by cannot say for sure how it was handled for some international companies or something to transfer some money somehow to make transportation on ships possible.
THE INTERVIEWER You had to payr money then.
MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN And that was the only way and the same way must say it the same way as we 10 had tried first tO save our children that good parents tried to save us.
12 And he my father we should not forget it made 13 it really possible to pay the transportation for the three of 14 us from Germany to America. And it was very very long way It was by train all the way from Berlin to Russia and 16 Poland what was still part of it 17 MR HARRY GLUCKMAN Poland didnt exist anymore 18 at that time
MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN Russia all the way by 20 train Russia Korea to Japan and to from Japan on the 21 Japanese ship here to America 22 MR. HARRY GLUCKAN Let me add couple of
things here because 24 MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN Its long story yeah.
25 MR HARRY GLUCKMAN -- its longer story than
Gluckman Family 24 it sounds the way you souPd it. Its -- and my father -- well we were just talking about the dates and what my father took out is this diary that he kept this day by day of the trip. think we just found out little while ago before you arrived that we left on September 11th 1940 --
MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN Excuse me one thing and have to interrupt because that might be important.
MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN Thats fine.
MR WALTER GLUCKMAN As said before in the 10 meantime the war had broken out so we even lived through the 11 war. already in Stuttgart and were.witness already from the 12 bombing Of the English planes in Germany and already in 13 Stuttgart we had to go to the basement to the cellar to live 14 two nights where the bombs -- 15 MR HARRY GLUCKMAN And stand on the roof and 16 cheer the British planes when they were able to get through 17 which was delight Yeah 18 MR WALTER GLUCKMAN So but if it is if it 19 is worthwhile if it is worthwhile to mention or is it do 20 cut you off now 21 THE INTERVIEWER Go ahead 22 MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN And even in the last week 23 we had -- we left Stuttgart think it was yeah it was 24 must. have been end of August for visit to my parents in 25 Breslau to say goodbye knowing most.probably that we will
Gluckrnan Family 25 not see each other anymore.
And as said before when our daughter left it was hard day but it might have been even harder.
And from Breslau we went to Berlin and put stay there in socalled pension for the last week because we had to stay there as we only there got our several visas.
had gone from Stuttgart before even for few days to Hburg where got hold of some of the necessary visas and the last week where we stayed in Berlin. beginning of 10 September we were there from this week think it was about 11 eigh.t or nine days we stayed every night in the cellar 12 because the English planes came.
13 And the only the only night when my wife think 14 it was not necessary to take to qo to bed or anything 15 the only time was when the English planes did not come
16 So- 17 MR HARRY GLUCKMAN think getting back to 18 the the trip the fact we were able to get the papers 19 think what has to be understood also is that there were 20 few companies still willing to buy and sell Jews for Deutsch
21 Marks 22 And one of the provisions of this this able to 23 get out was the fact that the entire trip from departure to 24 arrival in San Francisco Harbor had to be paid in advance in 25 Deutsch Mark.s or you didnt go.
Gluckrnan Family 26 That dont know. Maybe my father would.
But along with what youre saying dont know what the cost of it was but we were allowed Jews at that time were allowed to take out with them per person ten Deutsch Marks which at that time was worth about little more than three dollars per person. So was it fourtwenty Okay missed it little bit But was going by because we all remember that we arrived here with just little bit between the three of us little bit over three dollars 10 was it $2.40 or was it three dollars and something dont 11 remember. But it was around three dollars that we arrived
12 here with.
13 MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN inaudible 14 MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN But -- well we were going 15 to talk about the trip and my father just sort of glossed 16 over it because the enormity of the trip is hard to
17 understand.
18 When one boards the the first of all we 19 crossed what had been independent countries and had already 20 become part of the Nazi empire and part of the Russian 21 empire because we went through Latvia and Estonia and
22 Lithuania.
23 We were welcomed 24 THE INTERVIEWER inaudible.
25 MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN Yes. You want to
Gluckman Family 27
backtrack little bit
MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN have it here in front of me we left oh yes we left Berlin on the evening of the 11th of September 1940.
And when the train left Berlin tthe same time the English bombers bombed Berlin and we heard the following days that they were kind of successful. They had even bombed the famous Brandenburg Tor in Berlin. It was the very same night when we left.
10 On the 12th of September we came in the 11 morning to Kcnigsberg and to the German border in Eitkow.
12 And think the three of us will never forget what happened 13 there because ---now it comes all back to my memory too 14 things you didnt want to think anymore and remember.
15 went out of the train on this frontier correct in English.
eah was was going 18 to talk about that too.
19 MR WALTER GLUCKMAN And the frontier -- 20 MR. HARRY GLUCKNAN The the -- 21 MR WALTER GLUCKMAN -- station because we 22 had little bit more money in our pocket and at least 23 wanted to send this back and some postage stamps and so on 24 to my parents as they were not too well off anymore either 25 MRS. GLUCKMAN The food stamps.
Gluckman Family 28
MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN Food stamps too. That is right. My wife remembers better than do.
MR. HARRY GLUCKMN Not food stamps ration
coupons.
MRS.. GLUCKNAN Ration coupons.
MR. WALTER GLUCKrAN Ration coupons.
7. MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN Yeah. Its little different in the modern vernacular.
MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN And when came back 10 wanted to go back to the train there came Nazi in uniform with very hard looks of course Where did you Jew go 12 And saw my wife and my son standing in the 13 train at the window as white as here th.is piece of paper 14 because they were afraid and so was that he would never 15 let me go back to the train 16 But another came was more conductor of the 17 train said Oh let him go Let him go And was 18 fortunate enough could enter the train again And there 19 we went on to No Mans Land for us 20 dont know if should go so much in detail 21 MR HARRY GLUCKMAN No But think we have 22 to explain that we crossed we crossed Germany -- when we 23 left Germany we crossed Russian occupied territory now all 24 part of Russia of course and we were welcomed with what 25 was left of the remnants of the Jewish community in -- what to Pinsk. -- my recollection of it is is very vague and its sort of like deep dark dream. as small boy lonly recall some of the little the little rooms that they put me to sleep in were which were wooden shacks. remember wooden sidewalks and the the -- really what guess you could describe is the the old Steti paintings 10 that one sees of Lithuania and Poland.
11 THE INTERVIEWER Had you ever been to
12 Lithuania before 13. MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN German Jews didnt go to 14 Lithuania and Poland.
15 MR WALTER GLUCKM1N have written down 16 lady from the interest committee came and ordered another 17 MR HARRY GLUCKMAN They locked us up in the 18 train with. the lice.
19 MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN Orders another train
20
21 22 explanation of that. You have to let let me clarify 23 that little bit before we deal with that because we were 24 locked in these these cattle cars for reason and the 25 reason was that the the good will agreement between Stalin
Gluckman Family 30 and Hitler had about run its course and the Russians knew it.
And they were rushing troops to the front.
The trains were literally running 20 to 22 hours day through the day and night rushing troops to the front to stem this tide that they knew was coming.
So people going the other way tourists or refugees going in the other direction were shunted off through railroad siding and had to sit.
And since the trains were needed they could 10 only put us in those cattle cars.
11 Youre going to change tape 12 What were doing are you in operation there
13 Okay.
14 Because Ithink one has to understand the 15 enormity of this trip because in those days -- dont 16 know if youve ever taken train across the United States 17 as did once and it was four days and four nights but when 18 one gets on the Siberian Express in Moscow one spends 21 19 days and nights. We were three weeks on that train across 20 Russia. And that gives little bit of the enormity.
21 think my father might mention some of the 22 towns that we -- think after Minsk and Pinsk my 23 recollection of it is that we went around the largest lake 24 in the world Lake Baykal.
25 MR. WALTER GLUCKN In Moscow --
Gluckman Family 31
MR. HARRY GLUCKMN Oh we still haventt come to Moscow. Lets -- THE INTERVIEWER Why dont you --
MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN Yeah.
THE INTERVIEWER Why inaudible
MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN think you ought to cover
that yeah.
MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN Moscow of course was very very interesting and the trip was not pleasure trip 10 even but we were there well taken care of from committee 11 and they gave us even little money and some coupons and 12 so on and they let us make ride on this very interesting 13 MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN The Moscow subway.
14 MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN Moscow subway. It was 15 very impressive and one of the highlights of the otherwise 16 not so very pleasant trip.
17 MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN You could eat off the 18 floor and you could get sent to prison for life if you dirty
19 it.
20 MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN Then in the train 21 have written down we were 113 people 100 Jews immqrants 22 some nonJews an English couple and six Japanese And there 23 started big trouble with the meals in the train as the 24 people even fought themselves -- is it right to say 25 And this time had to go over and divided
Gluckman Family 32 them in groups that they didnt fight each other who comes first and who didnt get so much anymore.
There was very nice locating city Novosibirsk and of course dont want to go too much in detaU...
Fromallthe places whenever possible we send telegrams to both parents my parents in Breslau as well as to Telaviv where my wifes parents were living.
And then came the pretty famous city of Irkutsk and had very tough luck because sprained my ankle on the 10 station there and then we moved along what Harry started to 11 say already on the very beautiful Baykal Lake and we found
12 out 19 MR HARRY GLUCKMAN Makes Lake Tahoe look like
20 duck pond 21 MR WALTER GLUCKMAN That is not only that we 22 always talk from the very cold weather because it was there 23 very beautiful some of it. But we of course had no 24 possibility to witness in any way.
25 But in the train in the meantime about it
Gluckman Family 33 was the 22nd already almost two weeks we came in Manchuria to the well-known city of Harbin.
And the coincidence was that there cousin of my wife was living former former dentist in Breslau and think we had written to him that we came. And so he took care of the three of us for the few hours we were there.
He took me some place what never forgot in this ricksaw to go someplacei.I dont remember exactly where it was and took us the three of us to his home where we 10 finally after so many days got chance to have shower or bath and clean up little bit.
12 And he tried to even talk us into not going 13 along any further and staying there with him maybe we would 14 maybe find some other chances but we didnt want to do it 15 go to any risk 16 So on the same night we went out on with our 17 train trip and came to the border 18 MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN have to interrupt here 19 because therewas pretty frightening experience arriving 20 at the train station and having missed the train missed the 21 group that we were with and now here you are the only non 22 orientals in this whole damn city and not able to read or 23 speak or anything. Ill never forget that.
24 Did you want to say 25 THE INTERVIEWER This was in Manchuria.
Gluckman Family 34
MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN Oh in Manchuria Harbin Manchuria. think my father did say that.
THE INTERVIEWER You missed your train so --
MR. HARRY GLUCKMlN We we were by ourselves then in another train not with no we were no longer 10 with the group. We had been separated entirely from the
11 group.
14 MR HAPPY GLUCKM7N Yeah because we stayed 15 over there and they went on. And why are you shaking your head. Of course it was.
17 MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN You dont remember why.
was too small. dont 20 THE INTERVIEWER Go on.
21 MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN But continue.
22 MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN Its hard to read for me
IL
23 anymore anyway.
24 There we even met thiscouple fromBerlin with
25 their son.
Gluckman Family 35 THE INTERVIEWER In Harbin
MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN No in the train. And we got kind of friendly and we saw for many many years here
still.
MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN Oh yes. Thats right. MR. WALTER.GLUCKMAN The former doctor in Berlin. He passed away in the meantime. - . .
MR. HARRY CLUCKNAN His son did too.
MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN And his son did too.
10 And the boys got very good friends there and they even got 11 friendly with some of the officers in the meantime.
12 MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN Are they Japanese 13 MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN In the train dont 14 exactly remember what it was. Maybe youre right it was 15 Japanese or something 16 MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN Yeah. There were Japanese 17 soldiers. They taught us Japanese. We learned few words 18 of Japanese before we arrived in Japan.
19 MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN In the meantime we came 20 to Mukden. dont know what this is Korea already.
21 guess 22 MR HARRY GLUCKMAN Hmn- Mukden is 23 Manchuria But from there we went down into the the land 24 of the blossoms which was then called Chosen It was not 25 called Korea yet.
Gluckman Family 36 And to the southeastern tip of Korea which borders on the China Sea there we boarded ferry boat.
MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN Yeah. On the border they have very big formalities with the passports and questIonnaires for Japan where they wanted to know everything special from us. have this written down even.
Harry was very much interested for the ship already and they let him see that. And we came -- that must be the ferry what you -- 10 MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN That was the ferry boat ii which took us to Shimonoseki in Japan along with several 12 hundred other people one of those huge ferries that you 13 read about all the time that sink everyday.
14 THE INTERVIEWER What did you know about the 15 rest of the world at this point2 What was the news you were 16 getting about the war 17 MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN didnt know anything 18 about anything But yeah -- 19 MR WALTER GLUCKITAN have written down here 20 when we came to Shimonoseki -- 21 MR HARRY GLUCKMAN Crossing on the train 22 theJapanese kept kept the shades down. You were not allowed 23 to look out 24 THE INTERVIEWER It was European train 25 You ere segregated then.
Gluckman Family 37
MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN Siberia Express. They did not let us look put. They had the shades pulled down and nobody was supposed to see anything or to talk anything
or something.
So have written down here when we came to Shimonoseki and we sit . inthere l.. Japan. Shimonoseki must have been Japan.
MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN Thats the entrance point in Japan yeah. And then we boarded train there 10 Japanese train after we left the ferry which took us to -- 11 MRS. GLUCKMAN We pulled the shades down too
12 in Japan 13 MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN Yeah. In Japan itself iX1
14 Japan proper.
15 MR WALTER LUCKMAN Beautiful beautiful 16 traIn wagon have written down 17 THE INTERVIEWER How did they treat you the 18 Japanese do you remember 19 MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN This was still the same 20 same people. The people in the train didnTt change the 21 officials in the train 22 THE INTERVIEWER Then you didnt get off 23 MR. HARRY GLUCKNAN No it wasnt the same 24 train in Japan. No. No. No. That was an entirely different
25 thing.
Gluckman Family 38 Until we arrived in Korea but by the time we boarded the ferry and arrived in Japan we then got on different train and that train that was rather short trip just to across Japan to Yokohama.
MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN only remember very
distinctly
MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN No to Kobe to Kobe excuse me. To Kobe.
MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN only remember very 10 distinctly just talking from the personnel in the train 11 when the train left -- or when we left the train the moment 12 all the Russian attendants or personnel they stripped down 13 their uniforms and we saw that in reality they were all 14 Russian soldiers and not just train personnel. This 15 remeiJer very very distinctly.
16 So on the 27th of September shortly after 17 six oclobk we arrived in Kobe Japan.
18 MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN 1940.
19 MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN 1940. It was as said 20 about three weeks from the 11th until the 27th. It was 21 pretty long train ride.
22 And there in Kobe. there very soon taken over 23 from the committee.
24 THE INTERVIEWER The Committee was there then
25 too
Gluckman Family 39
MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN Well think the committee was part of Hias Phoneticat that time. It was reception committee that was set up in Kobe and in Yokohama.
MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN We were very well taken care of have written down. They gave us to eat and to drink there in the garden.
MR. HARRY GLUCKNAN Took me to the dentist.
MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN And it came like fast like coming to have enough of course after this long long 10 ride and not much tO eat and to drink.
14 world is my wife had to ask in the committee because she 15 has heavy pretty heavy toothache she wanted to be taken 16 to dentist. And to show how small the worldi when she 17 came to this dentist she found out that he originally was 18 from Breslau too and did know my mother very well in 19 Breslau. So but that is one of the funny coincidences 20 that came along.
21 And on the 28 of September we finally boarded 22 the ship the Japanese shipHyumaro Phonetic Japanese 23 boat. ithavE even writtendowæ the cabin number six beds in
24 it and 25 MR. HARRYGLUCKMAN Cabin is sort of an
Gluckman Family 40 exaggeration. It was sort of in the hold of this this freighter.
MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN Never forget this very
moment
MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN And the line was --
think we ought
then
MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN few days. Youll have to 10 look but it was the Nipon-Yusan-Kisha line which still 11 exists the NYK line is still shipping out of San Francisco.
12 MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN It was the next day from 13 our arrival in Kobe. In Kobe we did stay only two days but 14 have written down it is the last what wrote down it was very very memorable feeling of course It was fast 16 it was leaving the old world and everything behind us what 17 was fresh in our memory And of course knowing especially 18 that my parents and few relatives were still left were
19 left behind.
20 From Kobe the ship went to Yokohama and there 21 we again stayed few days and had of course to look for 22 the few little things that we had taken along not leaving 23 and missing anything because it was very very little things 24 what we had what we were allowed to take along but we were 25 witness from several things what nobody ever wanted to believe
Gluckman Family 41 us here until today can say because at twelve oclock noon when we were in the streets in Yokohama the whistle blows and everybody had to stay under curfew on the on the curves.
MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN Curb.
MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN Curb and did not could not go on because there were air preparations already. That was as said the last days of September 1940. In other words 14 15 months before Pearl Harbor.
And the night when our ship left Yokohama and this was Japan there were no lights on everything dark.
The ship left in complete darkness as they had as mentioned before this kind of air raid preparations so they must have been prepared for war already at this time.
13
MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN It was also that night
14 that we thats something else that recall because its
15 it had lot to do with shaping what am today. It was airefor shashanah was also 11th birthday when we sailed
17 out of the harbor of Yokohama
18
THE INTERVIEWER inaudible
19
MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN think mother should
20 put that on tape.
MRS. GLUCKMAN On the ship we were told this will be the last ship that will be leaving Japan to the United States in 1940.
MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN Of course the life on
25
Gluckman Family 42 the ship was not very pleasant either.
THE INTERVIEWER How long were you on the ship
MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN We were three weeks on the ship but not as people now make pleasurcruises but we were living
MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN In the hold of freighter.
We were allowed sure we had the run of the ship but the ship was first and foremost freighter and when my father said itwas no pleasure cruise it was neither pleasure nor 10 was it cruise.
11 The food that they gave us we were treated as 12 cattle and naturally whatever they didnt feed us wouldnt 13 cost them anything So we were fed -- and Id like to describ 14 the breakfast except dont want anybody here to lose their 15 dinner We were fed raw fish and stinking rotten raw fish
16 mostlyrotteneggs.
17 My father earlier mentioned the young young 18 boy with whom became friendly. There were other young 19 people on the ship one of whom still see who lives down
20 the peninsula.
21 Those of us who were preteens 11 12 13 14 22 years old sort of took it on ourselves to find our way into 23 the kitchen when the crew was not around and we were able to 24 raid the galley and to get some of this food into the people 25 the Jewish refugees who were waiting there to eat.
Gluckman Family 43
THE INTERVIEWER inaudible
MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN There was large group.
How many people were there think it tells in this theres very interesting article which appeared upon arrival in the San Francisco news and think itll tell you probably.
See how many take look at how many people there are in
minute.
But anyway we were able to appropriate this food and one of our great pleasures was one of us would be the lookout at the door for when crew would be coming and the rest of us would take the rotten food and heave it right 12 out through one of the portholes.
13 So it was quite an adventure for young kids.
14 What transpired on that ship what youre lookin 15 at there is newspaper as said the San Francisco news 16 which covered the arrival of this refugee ship and the 17 picture of the group and my fathers pointing to my picture 18 which appeared in the the newspaper and which had very 19 very important also very important aftereffect in our lives 20 here in San Francisco.
21 Iow rpany people were on that ship7 It was it 22 was it was covered by the San Francisco papers primarily 23 because there were five deaths on board including the 24 suicide of Japanese woman who had been sold to marriage 25 by her parents to someone herein the United States.
Gluckinan Family 44
MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN Theret no number in that
one thing.
THE INTERVIEWER No number.
MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN There was no number given
Okay.
MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN When our shin arrived -- when our ship arrived in Hawaii that was of course for us the first the first light of Heaven because we saw there the first American flag. And what this meant we will not 10 forget because it meant finally freedom.
11 And there it was kind of very nice and amusing 12 for us too. We had to swim in the ocean there what was 13 big earn to us From there it was still -- today you make 14 it in four or five hours by plane but from there it was 15 still think another week to go.
16 And finally we arrived in San Francisco. And
17 when -- 18 THE INTERVIEWER inaudible 19 MR. WALTER GLUCKNAN And when we saw San 20 Francisco think most of us went to our knees and thanked 21 God because that is of course not to describe with words 22 what that meant and we sailed under the Golden Gate Bridge 23 into the United States.
24 And here 25 MRS GLUCKMAN Here am and here Ill stay
Gluckman Family 45
MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN Those were the words what my wife said Here am and here stay.u And that is still today what we did.
On the same afternoon we were greeted by the Committee by the --
MR. HARRY GLTJCKMAN No. It was the the -- and Ill be forever grateful to the Council of Jewish Women. MR. WALTER GLtJCKMAN Council of Jewish Women. MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN Who welcomed us and -- 10 MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN They welcomed us on 11 California Street in their home for some coffee and cake or 12 whatever it was.
13 MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN And got deathly ill 14 because we couldnt handle the rich food. Wed never -- Id 15 never eaten some of these things 16 MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN And the lady from the 17 Council came around to serve us to help us and she found 18 out that we are coming from Stuttgart She said Oh wait 19 moment. have cousin here who was living in Stuttgart 20 coming on the ship.
21 humanly possible7 We never
22 heard anything.
23 was bowling together with him in Stuttgart 24 but he had seen in the newspaper what came out around noontime 25 as my son mentioned already San Francisco News that had got
Gluckman Family 46 out already in the newspaper picture from us Jewish refugees because reporter came ahead onboard of the ship and they put this picture already in there.
MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN Incidently can interrupt to talk little bit about this article First of all think it its it should be clarified that the group that was -- the group of refugees that was on the train on the Trans-Siberian Express the majority of them were not aslucky as we and they had papers 10 only as far as Shanghai and that was back to all the -- 11 yeah from Mukden they then headed north to Shanghai.
12 With with the ship however it indicates 13 that there were hundred and sixty refugees aboard the 14 HaiyoMaru Phonetic half of whom and Im quoting the 15 article here half of whom were to debark here and in Los 16 Angeles and the others at Mexican and Latin American ports.
17 And at the end of the article last part of the 18 article says The vessle was due to continue her voyage to 19 Valparaiso Chile tomorrow.
little bit because
inaudible Yeah and the majority of 24 themr in mosb cases at that time did go on to Latin American
25 ports
Gluckman Family 47 You want to talk about --
MR. WALTER GLUCKAN dont know inaudible
MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN Okay. Lets stop for second. Just lets put this on tape and let me preface it to say that this really is -- this yeah but want to say something here because its important to to future students of of the Jewish society in America and how it was shaped by the immigration of of the European Jews the the preholocaust the refugees like us who came out literally 10 five minutes before midnight before the gates were slammed
11 shut.
12 And it has lot to do with with where we are 13 today in the United States as Jews politically and socially 14 and economically because in those early days the the very 15 reason that not many Jews were saved who could have been 16 saved by the the the lack of political clout of political 17 strength of the Jewish community and the devisiveness of the 18 Jewish community at that time It also had lot to do with 19 the attitude of the Jews who had come earlier who were not 20 willing to accept refugees into their midst who were not 21 prepared to assist in any way because it endangered their 22 social and their economic position and this has been true 23 of every immigration to this country over the years. Its 24 evident now in the lack of welcome for the influx of the 25 orientals and the separation and think with that we get
G.uckman Family 48 into where we were when we arrived here with $2.40 for the thiee of us and somebody said well here you are and the Jewish community and would put community here in quotes and underlined because it really wasnt community it just sort of it just happened here.
There was the Jewish Family Service which in those days we endearingly called the Eureka if youve ever been there you know the words over the door they were of some assistance and did help us in getting located in terms
10 of loaning.
11 But think we ought to talk little bit and 12 let my father talk and maybe my mother as well about the 13 the difficulty of reestablishing life here and finding 14 way because it didnt begin in this house with with nice 15 furniture and and it began lot different and really 16 dont want to continue talking here because my recollections 17 are quite different 18 Id like to come back and Id like my father 19 to take over here and talk about that that start because 20 for me it was very easy. went to school and learned -- 21 in three weeks learned the English language because because 22 was fortunate enough to have couple friends. But lets 23 lets the the starting over and the finding of job was 24 an. extremely difficult thing.
25 . . And just want to say one other thing on that
Gluckman Family 49 and then Im going to let my father take over and Ill rest
my voice.
think its important that we record how difficult it was. One of the one of the requirements for getting number visa to leave Germany it was requirement of the. American in addition to the affidavit which meant that someone here would vouch for you and that you would not become burden on the state or on the country was that you had trade with which you could support 10 yourself when you arrived.
11 My father mentioned earlier that he worked for 12 firm in which his father had started as an apprentice in 13 his youth and had gone all the way to the the chairman of 14 the boardof president or whatever large firm. But its 15 one trade which my father learned as an apprentice and 16 and worked all Of his working days in Germany but not 17 particularly marketable commodity in the United States because 18 if youre familiar with what veneer is it just isnt used 19 too much since since the advent of vinyl and plastics and 20 all the other things.
21 So it meant not having trade when he arrived
22 here.
23 Before we left Germany1 my father retrained 24 as baker and confectioner and that -- the hope was that 25 this would provide employment and Sustenance when we
Gluckman Family 50
arrived.
And he paid someone who who came to our home our our apartment in Stuttgart and they bought machinery and bowls and all sorts of mixing equipment.
And every night remember as kid used to hate the sound of these damn machines running these these whipping whipped cream and mixing. used to say God why do we have to live it was like living in boiler factory And while its amusing now looking back in 10 retrospect it meant the difference between getting these 11 papers and havinga viable trade when we arrived here.
12 So having said that think its important 13 that nOw we hear from my father what happened when he 14 learned this trade and try.ing to break into job here now.
15 San Francisco of course was in those days 16 blessed with not only the Langendorf bakery but the 17 Waxman Bakery and the Ukrain Bakery and in those days there 18 were fourteen major Jewish bakeries. And Im underlining 19 Jewish here Jewishowned and Jewish-operated bakeries.
20 Now my father is wrinkling his nose which 21 means hes going to take over the microphone so Ill rest 22 MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN No didnt mean that 23 because didnt dont think its too much to go in details 24 because as Harry mentioned already of course my wife 25 started working on the third day when we arrived here found
Gluckman Family 51 job in household household help to clean wash whatever possible and Harry started right away the next Monday to go to school.
The only thing what could do was to look for jobs to go shopping where 1. at this time could get day old bread for five cents piece or
THE INTERVIEWER inaudible
MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN Three heads of lettuce for ten Cents or two for five or whatever.
10 MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN And five pound sack of
very well we 13 were living the first time in an apartment. It was two- 14 socalled two-room apartment with lady she was with us on 15 the ship together and we made $25. month. .
16 MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN But Dad want to add 17 also started to work right after that didnt just start 18 school No wasnt selling newspapers In those days 19 we sold magazines and sold Colliers Saturday Evening 20 Post Liberty and even later took in line of comic books 21 that sold door to door So it wa in the drencher 22 THE INTERVIEWER You learned the language
23 quickly.
24 MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN Very quickly.
25 MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN Quicker than his father
Gluckrnan Family 52 of course. It was much easier.
But the main trouble for me was cannot say law but it was habit that all the bakeries all were union jobs and they took only member of the union and gave them
work But the other way around you could not get in the union become member of the union when you could not prove that you have job.
MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN Well that was exactly the 10 same Catch 22 that existed when got out of high school and 11 had job wanted to be cainet maker or carpenter 12 you remember. had friend of my parents who was willing 13 to hire me but had to be in the union first and this 14 is the same situation. You had to be in the union first 15 but you couldnt get into the union until you had job 16 And thats how they kept you out 17 MR WALTER GLUCKNAN It was the first beginning 18 think its going too far started to make my own 19 business so to call baked in the kitchen 20 IVTR HARRY GLUCKMAN At home in the apartment 21 MR WALTER GLUCK1TAN At home in the apartment 22 where got up at three oclock and baked and my wife bouqht 23 some cookies and something in small in small store 24 where they bought thisr and was very happy when made $5 25 in the week and was baking late at night --
Gluckman Family 53
MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN Yeah think we need to say that. think this is part of San Francisco history.
There was an opportunity shop. It was -- and think it should be on this think you maynot have heard it but it was on Polk Street and was just there couple of days ago with my wife we were looking at that location. Theres another store there now.
It was between just below Sutter Street towards Post on Polk Street. And it was principally for 10 this purpose. They sld -- people knitted and people baked and people did other things and brought them in there and 12 they brought them. It was called the San Francisco Opportunit 13 Shop. And it existed for many years that way.
14 THE INTERVIEWER So you -- 15 MR WALTER GLUCKMAN Then was looking 16 around of course all the time for other jobs and one of 17 my main purposes at the same time was to find something what 18 might have given me the opportunity to go around because 19 had found here some old family relations cannot say 20 family anymore but had brought picture along that my old 21 aunt or my grandmother whatever itwas and found their 22 son And after many many many tries and visits to see him 23 he was lawyer here in San Francisco. finally got from 24 him the affidavit or the fees for an affidavit for my 25 parents. This was my main tryingbf course still to save
Gluckman Family 54 the life of. my parents.
Im sorry to say was not successful anymore and it was too late. And took jobs especially for this purpose of delivery driver here. was driving around San Francisco for all different kinds of jobs especially for --
MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN The Shumate Drugstore up near the Mount Zion Hotel.
MR.WALTER GLUCKMAN Yeah from store to store
and so on.
10 And going in this detail we hardly had any 11 connection anymore of course There was no mail in lona 12 time and the sad end of it of course is that my parents 13 were brought tO concentration camp in Poland and probably 14 to dont remember the names now -- and that was the end 15 of it for them as well as. . for other relatives we have left 16 and friends. We never had heard anymore maybe very 17 occasionally some note from the that course but that 18 the only memory we have besides few letters and what we had
19 received here.
20 MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN Yeah what am supposed
21 tosay 22 MR WALTER GLUCKMPLN hadnt -- 23 MR HARRY GLUCKM1N Well do you want to talk 24 about how you finally got the job that -- 25 MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN No.
Gluckman Family 55 THE INTERVIEWER. . Harry when you came here and people knew that you were refugees they knew that you had come from Europe Europe was at war and you were escaping that you were what you were Germans you spoke German. What did you tell themwhen you told them you had to leave because you were Jews because we were afraid of our lives.
Did they believe you
MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN Oh yes. Oh yes. They believed us but we were we were we were in this legal way 10 we were still German and can even tell in this respect 11 can tell you that we had we were under the law we had to 12 have curfew. We were not allowed to go out at night for 13 THE INTERVIEWER inaudible 14 MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN -- dont know how long 15 it was And we had -- 16 MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN Alien registration card.
17 MR WALTER GLUCKMAN -- alien registration
18 card 19 THE INTERVIEWER Going through Japan 20 MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN Of course we had 21 right away filed for the first papers and of course after 22 five years became became American citizens.
23 MR HARRY GLUCKIIAN Yeah but in the early 24 days --- and think what what you were alluding to and 25 lets talk about that little bit. First of all it was
Gluckrnan Family 56 long time as an 11year-old -- as 12year-old that could stop from shaking when heard sirens or heard footsteps during the night you know that sort of thing.
Going to school it was it was very exciting starting school right away learning the language and in very short time became very popular figure in the school because having played soccer in Germany became very star player here because of that -- the bther kids soccer was not big game here in those days.
10 different kind of an effect was that as 11 result of my conversations with some of my classmates there 12 were Jewish classmates of mine who for years were forbidden 13 to have anything to do with me or to allow me into their 14 homes because told them terrible stories and they couldnt 15 sleep And they didnt -- yeah was going to say they 16 didnt believe it. had -- was joking with an old 17 classmate of mine whom you might know is Merla Zoellerbach 18 who did some writing for the Chronicle. We were kidding about 19 it one time and she recalls -- because we were classrtateS 20 all the way through grammar school and high school and some 21 of the other kids were forbidden by their parents to have 22 anything to do with me because after they heard these storLes 23 they couldnt sleep at night.
24 What my mother said is true and most of them 25 didnt believe it until -- well it was just no it was --
Gluckman Family 57 MRS. GLUCKMAN was in the house bfa Jewish
lady-- THE INTERVIEWER Sit down be comfortable.
MRS. GLUCKMZ\N was working in the house of Jewish lady. She spoke German. My English wasnt very good then.
But told her theyre putting the Jews in concentration camps and they put them in the gas chambers. But they said it could not be that bad.
10 When we told them that its in Japan theyre 11 preparing for war they said YouYre kidding.
12 is true. We were told on the 13 leave Japan after the one we 14 came on. We dont know we didnt keep any track of it if 15 it happened or not But thats what we were told thats 16 what we told them here and nobody wanted to believe it.
17 Thats the story 18 MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN Lets put that on tape 19 please because think this is very important because at -- 20 first what were talking about what were discussing is is 21 getting my sister to rejoin the fajnily here after four or five 22 years and obviously young girl she was then not yet ten 23 years old was not allowed to travel alone and would have to be 24 accompanied by an adult.
25 So my parents moved Heaven and Earth and wrote
58 they read in the newspaper that some performer was going to England to enter tam the troops.
And among others well first were performers who were regular travelers back and forth by ship and we have letter to pleading letter that was written to Deanna Durbin who was at that time scheduled to entertain troops in England and pleading with her to perhaps bring my sister to the United States.
10 There was an exchange of communication with the 11 wife of President Roosevelt Eleanor Roosevelt who had 12 become somewhat of world traveler and was scheduled to 13 travel to England.
14 And an answer back not from Mrs. Roosevelt 15 but on her behalf from the United States Department of State 16 indicating that this would be impossible. If you read between 17 the lines the reason it was imDossible is because it was not 18 desirable on the part of the Democratic party for the wife 19 of the President to bring Jewish child along during an 20 election campaign for the presidency. mean thats thats 21 parenthetic note think it needs to be said however 22 dont know if theres anything else to say on 23 that subject except that finally my parents made -- did make 24 contact with someone in England who was planning to make 25 trip to the United States and then did well dont shake
Gluckman Family 59 your head. Correct me on the tape
MR. WALTER GLUCKMN think it was think it was with the help of the committees again.
MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN Okay.
MR. WALTER GLUCKNAN They brought children back and finally in summer of 1945 --
MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN 45 just short of ten years old yeah.
MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN She was she was -- 10 MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN Six and half years after
11 yeah.
12 MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN Yeah. So finally -- 13 MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN Well no. No. Lets get 14 the exact date when it actually was because they want this 15 on the tape and apparently said 45 and it was wrong 16 If it was wrong lets correct it.
17 MR WALTER GLUCKNAN She was born in 35 18 In summer of 1946 we were finally informed 19 that she was coming back on this think it was also 20 Holland ship and had to go to New York to meet her the 21 daughter we didnt know anymore 22 Of course went by train. My wife and son 23 brought me to Oakland to the train. left here on 24 Saturday night. remember it almost it would have been last 25 week. Arrived in New York on Wednesday morning. It doesnt
Gluckman Family 60 sound possible anymore today that you can make it in five hours but it was this way.
And there in New York spent few days with some good friends of mine and these friends took me on Monday morning to the harbor in New York where some other people with me were standing waiting.
And of course this other moment never will forget as long as live. When the ship arrived and there some youngsters some children stormed down the way some 10 where the parents knew them and some that they did not know
11 them.
12 Of course then one of them was I. didnt 13 know now who is she and theres she coming now.
14 So we found each other and on the same 15 evening left with her with the train going back to San very strange of course want this7 No thank 18 you or Yes please Very very well educated and brought 19 up but as mentioned before shy.
20 would offer her sbthethingtO eat or what she 21 didnt want Of course it was not so easy Im not very 22 perfect up till today with the English language and she
Gluckman Family 61
MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN Potatoes some water and
SOQfl.
But we got friendlier with each other got acquainted and on -- again on think it was Friday dont know for sure anymore should find the date we arrived here in SanFrancisco on the 17th of Nay 1946.
That is according to my wife helping. She has better 10 And although this was not very easy all in the small apartment and dont want to miss this occasion 12 to mention that we have to thank our son Harry who made it 13 very much easier for us as the difference in age was not 14 this big of course and he brought us as family together.
15 Of course dontt want to miss to say that 16 she of course wasnt directly home with us because coming 17 with three years old io this other family in England that 18 were more her parents than we were here.
19 But as her foster mother in England has 20 mentioned and written to us several times from the very 21 first day we will never let her forget her real parents 22 What was remarkable but we never will forget it was this
LJ 23 way and little by little she got acquainted here with us 24 maybe Harry. got in here because now she had to start here 25 going to school the same school what Harry went first and
Gluckinan Family 62 in 1948 we bought our little house where we still are living today and as little as it was it was big enough for the
four of us.
But Harry had to marry it was in big rush the house was not too small and not too long after this he got married so that there are only three of us in the house. Maybe he will cut in here dont know that its anything special to mention about the first time with Marian.
THE INTERVIEWER Marian did she know why you 10 had sent her. Was she confused 11 MR. WALTER GLUCKNAN Oh yes. You are 12 absolutely right. That is very important point.
13 MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN Yeah. . It was very very 14 difficult transition for her and it was she understood 15 it but she never really did and it it was long long time 16 before she really understood it.
17 think she was an adult before things began 18 to fall into place.
19 MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN In fact this has to be 20 mentioned that this was not Jewish home in England 21 MR HARRY GLUCKMAN She thought she had been
22 rejected and 23 MRS. GLUCKMAN She thought we had sent her 24 away for good. cant speak.
25 MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN Okay.
Gluckman Family 63
MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN Besides this it has to be mentioned in this respect that the home in England where she was living was not Jewish home That had made tiny little bit difference too.
We never were very THE INTERVIEWER Wait. They were Quakers
MRS. GLUCKMAN Yeah.
MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN Mm-hmm Quaker. It was Quaker family very devout religious Quaker family and 10 yeah do recall that.
11 And so the transition into into -- it was 12 whole -- it was not different place it was different 13 world. It was like had she come to ailother planet and 14 culture shock is probably the best way to describe it. She 15 was very unhappy little girl when she arrived. And the 16 politeness that my father mentionedalong the way extended 17 later later to our dining room table when we had meals It 18 carried on for long time because kids just dont say 19 thank you and please and may have when they feel at home 20 So it was it was long time in coming. It 21 was very difficult thing for her 22 THE INTERVIEWER Did she know she was Jewish
U.
23 MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN dont think she knew 24 what being Jewish meant It had no significance for her at
25 the--
Gluckman Family 64
MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN inaudible
MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN --- at the at the age of 11 it didnt but well was just going to say that she did she was sent to religious schoolas most kids kids dont go to religious school theyre sent.
And religious schools by nature are not very good vehicle for learning. Theyretheyre type of reform school.
So the the learning of of new practices that 10 came very slowly. One would have to say we were not we were 11 not orthOdox by any means. We observed the holidays and 12 that was about it.
13 THE INTERVIEWER Dyouremenber the holidays 14 MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN DO remember the holidays 15 Of course but whats there to say about the holidays 16 THE INTERVIEWER Well inaudible 17 MR HARRY GLUCKMAN Theyre holidays We did 18 we did attend services We attended services 19 In the first days when we came here and before 20 and shortly after my Bar Mitzvah did go to services every 21 Shabouth until was turned off by Rabbi 22 But thats another thats whole different 23 story that doesnt belong on this tape.
24 Im not sure can add much to that. She did 25 she did go to -- yeah she was Bat Mitzvah and she attended
Gluckman Family 65 Sunday School until shortly after that guess too.
THE INTERVIEWER You said when she got in town that she understood for while that she felt rejected. When did she overcome that feeling about how and where she
MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN Thats tough question to answer. Im not sure and and and my parents will disagree with this but in some ways dont think she ever didin her subconscious mind. dont know. Thats too difficult
to answer.
10 MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN dont think sc. My
11 wife 12 MRS. GLUCKII\N She wanted to go back to England 13 because she said You didnt want me You sent me away when 14 was so small Thy did you ask for me to come back to you7 15 In the very beginning when she came we told her the reason 16 but she didnt she didnt understand it.
17 And it was very very hard The first year was 18 very hard had fights and we had tears and it was nOt 19 very easy for us had to work he couldnt work had to 20 take her along to the jobs that had. had three diferent 21 jobs day one in he morning to clean house one in the 22 afternoon to clean house In the evening went babysitting 23 for 25 an hour and got lO car fare back and forth frOm the
24 job.
25 went home at three oclock in the morning and
Gluckman Family 66 started at six oclock the next.
And some places took her along and the ladies knew what was happening and they were very nice and polite.
In most houses was by myself. She was sitting down with book either reading or when she went to school she was very unhappy too because she had the English accent and the kids were laughing at her In England she was very unhappy because she was German girl She was Jewish girl and she was not 10 very happy in the beginning 11 IIR WALTER GLUCKAN Germany already she was
12 Jewish girl 13 PS CLUCKMAN Yeah 14 ITR WALTER GLUCKIVTAN In England 15 MRS GLUCKMAN And came home when she was three 16 years old with hole in her head and the boy next door said 17 You Jew go home And she said What that2 Why did 18 he hit me2 19 It took it took about year and half two 20 years until we were getting close and closer And she and 21 she made friends they came to the house and so on Thats
22 it.
23 THE INTERVIEWEP Tell us about her getting
24 married 25 MR WALTER GLUCKNAN Thats going too far
Gluckman Family 67 Thats going too far.
THE INTERVIEWER MavhØoff tape.
MR. WALTER GLUCKNAN But now you told about your jobs don know its from any interest inaudible THE INTERVIE1ER It is important that that -- what you had said before about them not believing MRS. GLUCKMAN Yeah. Thats that wasnt the
worst
inauaible conversation 10 HR WALTER GLUCKNAN Working for 28 years till 11 retired Is this worth to mention however2 12 THE INTERVIEWFF What do you do for the last
13 28 years 14 MR HALTER GLUCKIAN Mter about 12 or 13 jobs 15 what have the first two years finally found job in the 16 wellknown company of Joseph IAegnine Phonetic as shipping 17 and receiving clerk and started there in 1942 and stayed 18 there for the coming 28 years till retired in 1970 19 And that is more inaudible 20 THE INTERVIEWER Harry what did you pursue7 21 HRRY GLUCKMAN Yeah Thats that really 22 is what wanted to say Are we back live and in color2 23 made some some remark earlier about and 24 guess its we are what we are and some things along the 25 way that really shaped my whole my whole life even now
Gluckman Family 68 today some of the some of my experiences as as youngste in Germany and oarticularly the day we left that my father talked about and the adventure at the border with with being stoDped and the thought that the train ias going to pull out with mj mother and myself on board and my father left behind under afrest sort of made an unspoken vow that day never to set foot on Cerman soil again which interestingly enough dont know ifit belongs on this tape but im going to say it Im about to break in few 10 days almost 44 years to the day that we left Ill be back 11 there next week Its lot of years and thers lot of 12 reasons for it.
13 Some of mj experiences when came here as 14 youngster in San Francisco as Je in San Francisco and 15 as different kind of Jew from those other Jews who were
16
17
18
19 20 THE INTERVIEWER The Jews that were here 21 established the San Francisco Jewish community inaudible 22 but what about what about that Can you inaudible 23 MR HARRY GLUCKMPIN Well in San Francisco 24 as in most places in the United States but more so in the 25 west coast there were several Jewish communities and you
Gluckman Family 69 just mentioned there was RussianPolishJewish community and GermanJewish community and just within the German Jews there were those that came nere during the gold rush and many of whom the Weinbergers and others who today are influential Christians in the political scene who in those days had grandfathers who were Jewish merchants who were peddlers and if you scratch most of those people deep enough youll find Jewish blood.
They didnt take too kindly to to the refugees 10 and and -- 11 THE INTERVIEWER inaudible 12 HR H2\RPY GLUCK4AN No they didnt believe 13 word about what told them and the the -- and Ill mention 14 some of the kids went to school with because where we 15 lived we lived near Hount Zion Hospital in the in whats 16 called the western addition You want to check your batteries 17 Or change -- 18 THE INTERVIEWER When they go they go Sorry
19 Continue 20 HR HARRY GLUCKMPN What -- well no think 21 this needs to be said for historical Durposes because it had 22 lot to do with shaping the Jewish community in San Francisco 23 You asked me if kids believed what had told 24 them about what had seen.
25 THE INTERVIEWER You are survivors of the Nazi
Gluckman Family 70
Germany.
MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN We we had very peculiar and differentstory to tell and even today its different from those who were less fortunate than we were. We were amongst the very last lucky ones to get out.
The people who tried three or four weeks after us to get out didnt They went to the camps and many of them didnt survive. Many of my parents friends and relative of ours guess our family was about probably numbered 60 10 to 80 people and think wre --- other than those who went 11 to Palestine and dont like to use the word Palestine 12 lets call it Israel prestate days Israel are the only 13 survivors And that takes us full circle to why Im going 14 to Germany next week after making that vow 15 Let let me deal first with the question about 16 oeople in San Francis-eo--Jews---i San---Fra-nci--S-co not---on-ly--- --- 17 didnt believe what we had to tell but they werent even 18 remotely interested in what we had to tell and that really 19 is the important thing Jews were not unified at all Jews 20 were not Jews in San Francisco until Israel victoriously 21 celebrated the six-day war There was no Jewish community 22 in San Francisco until 1967.
23 have said this from the pulpit of temple 24 and continue to say it until die Jewish kids the 25 Fleishachers Phonetics and the Zoellerbachs and Other
Gluckman Family 71 kids with whom went to school in San Francisco because went to chool at Grant School and was friendly with kids at Grant and at Pacific Heights. They were the the very most affluent of the early Jewish settlers. They were the the people who went to Temple Emmanuel and looked down their noses at kids who wore short pants and didnt vant anything to do with kids who didnt come to school with chauffeur
driven limousine.
THE INTERVIEWER Thats still the same.
10 MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN
just 11 going to say it hasnt changed bit and went on from there 12 to Lowell High School with the same kids and until 13 tried very hard to transfer outof Lowell because was very 14 unhappy with it for pat1y for that reason.
15 In 48 and to this day my parents do not 16 know that may have said it jokingly couple of times 17 but came very close to leaving San Francisco in 1948 when 18 several friends of mine left to fight for Israel in the early
19 days 20 Now didnt graduate from high school until 21 June of 48 and the reason didnt go in April when several 22 friends of mine left was primarily because the principal of 23 Lowell High School in those days Mr. Stevens said Do 24 whatever you want to do but wait until after June 25 But late in May met my now bride of some
Gluckman Family 72 wont say how many years mOre years than wed care to
remember.
And so that postponed my my first visit to Israel for many many many years until 1971. And in 1971 when went to Israel fOr the first time with my parents and my wife the aftermath of group that was putting together and had sold some 18 people on going all of whom later cancelled out so the four of us went and for the first time in my life felt at home because have never in all 10 the years in this country and this country has been 11 wonderful to me to us should say to all of us it has 12 been more than good its been almost home but have 13 truly never felt and still feel that as Jews we will 14 outlive our days and our welcome here as we did in every 15 other place that we have lived in the world 16 Ive always said that it would probably come 17 around the turn of the century and may have missed by 18 few years but never really felt at home until arrived 19 in Israel Thats the only place Ive ever felt at home 20 And that has that goes back to why Im going 21 to Germany because the only relative that have the only 22 blood relative that have in the world other than my
23
24 25 My father was an only child so it was not
Gluckinan Family 73 possible for me to have more than one cousin. And she lives in Israel and is at the moment in Germany and Im going to visit with her for few days so well get to see each
other.
THE INTERVIEWER inaudible
MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN So were going to meet on neutral ground in Germany for few days. So
MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN inaudible
MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN It also yeah Im going 10 to when returned from Israel after that first visit 11 shall cut it short here or because you asked me what do 12 do and many years ago made pledge that would continue 13 to work the rest of my days on behalf of my people and that 14 is what do. .
15 t7hen came back from Israel went to work 16 for the Israel Bond Organization.
17 During the Yom Kippur war worked as speclal 18 representative of the finance ministry of the State of Israel 19 throughout the northwestern United States. later went to 20 work for ORT as the first director for ORT for this area for 21 about seven years.
22 have done lot of other things in the Jewish 23 community as volunteer but as professional also work 24 for the Jewish National Fund and Im now the executive 25 director for the Charitsitic Phonetic Medical Center in
Gluckman Family 74
Jerusalem.
That -- well BNai.BRith is something else thats in volunteer capacity.
live in San Francisco. Oh no work as fund raiser as directorfor theorganization here. Im director for the Pacific Northwest and -- with headquarters
in San Francisco.
THE INTERVIEWER inaudible
MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN You do Good. Ill take 10 your check as go out the door.
11 In any case all of that all of that back- 12 ground is is guess by way of saying that do what do 13 as result of being what am and paying back.
14 Somebody somebody paid for us and now now 15 think Im repaying what what was given to me.
16 There was something else wanted to add to 17 that but sort of lost he train of thought here 18 THE INTERVIEWER Where is home for you7 19 MP RARRY GLUCKJIAN IN more at home in Israel 20 than am right here although -- 21 THE INTFRVIEWER inaudible 22 MR HARRY GLUCK1AN Well yeah Im sorry 23 Thats my feeling wrote an article on one of my trips 24 back from Israel wrote an article that appeared in 25 number of publications here said that as looked through
Gluckman Family 75 that little porthole on this plane and watch that little speck of green getting smaller and smaller and theres this vast expanse of brown and gray Irr Im goinq home Im returning home but Im leaving the only home that know.
And thats thats the way feel.
THE INTERVIEWER Do you feel safe here 1R HAPRY GLtJCKMAN Safer there in what way7
As Jew or
THE INTERVIEWER inaudible 10 ITR HARRY GLUCKMAN Thats very thats 11 difficult question You get into . ll sorts of political
12 things there 13 Safer Yes. Yeah feel safer there as 14 Jew. It depends on whether you mean threatened as Jew or 15 whether you mean dont dont see the Jews surviving 16 in the rest of the world. dont see us as being welcome 17 any place for very long Were very difficult people were 18 very hard to get along with and its not too surprising that 19 we are the root of anti-Semitism ourselves think we
20 recognize that 21 If youre talking about safety Im -- Ive 22 given lot of speeches about Israel and Ill tell you what 23 always said when came back and people ask me did feel
24 safe there 25 remember my parents and walking home at one
Gluckman Family 76 oclock or one-thirty in the morning from the reception after the Bar Mitzvah of my cousints younger son. We were walking through Tel Aviv and it was after one oclock in the morning and we saw little girls walking home alone from parties.
Now do you feel safe here THE INTERVIEWER suppose you are survivor.
MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN That was changed too.
MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN Unfortunately yeah thats
10 changed. Everything changes. Yeah. They even lock their
11
doors there now.
12 THE INTERVIEWER mean not to suggest that
13 youre paranoid inaudible Aerican youre talking about the turn of the century. Im sort of interested what
15 you were talking about
MR. HARRY GLUCKNAN Well you see what Im
17
talking about is
18 THE INTERVIEWER inaudible paranoid
19
MR. HARRY GLUCKNAN remember went to
20 New York some years ago and was sitting you want to shut
21
it off.
THE INTERVIEWER Do doyou mind
23
MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN No. No. 11 answer your question either on the tape or off the tape. It doesnt
25
matter.
Gluckman Family 77 The the the Jew in American thought had just about run full cycle when Ronald P.eagan was elected Governor of California.
And was sitting in New York at the conference table of national meeting of ORT and they were kidding me about this this actor thats just been electec Governor of California. And said you know This may sound little ridiculous now but you better get used to calling him rr.
President.
10 And there was uproarious laughter. Broke up the 11 meeting. The meeting almost ended because of what said.
12 dont remember what year that was 76 77.
13 saw lot of signs in those days and it 14 wasnt necessarily ry dealings with Alan Benson and the Nazi 15 Party because that was too farfetched But there were signs 16 from the left There were lot of signs there were lot 17 of signs that we saw in cermany in the 30s that we saw in 18 America in the mid70s.
19 THE INTERVIEWER You dont think here in Areric 20 theres the it could happen again and it could happen again.
21 ilaybe not here but somewhere else 22 MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN After all this would 23 few times Itake this too to the papers warming out our 24 memories. Happily they bought it. But now it is very hard 25 to say very hard to say.
Gluckman Family 78
MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN. Well think the lesson our our liberty and our think thats really the watchword and figure we can end on that now
THE INTERVIEWER inaudible
MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN The Nazi about -- mean it this way about we lost what we had and losjncr our people and our family ana even what mentioned in between with you finding again some some friends or some farrily of 10 friends we although were not fortunate enough to revive or 11 whatever you call it and because that is what was asking 12 whats the name your chum7 15 hard to answer It was as tried to mention whatever we 16 did you wouldnt be possible other ones had not done maybe 17 to save these people 18 And what had found here going through these 19 few little things and my wife helped me think what even 20 didnt know what had letter here from some very distant 21 relative or sorething and it described the last few days my 22 beloved parents were in Breslau because they were transported
23 away 24 And this cannot be mentioned enough and enough.
25 Of course that is what people hear and even after the last
Gluckman Family 79 Nazis or coworkers with them tried to there was no not ever holocaust so this couldnt be underlined enough as we are personal witness and have even letters in black and white what happened to then.
And here found this one letter what is short enough or it says enough for the last help even picking the few things what they were alloyed . o take with therr as we had to do.
Of course have found here some letters even 10 what we were allowed to take or not. From this few things 11 what we were allowed to take we never got Ue ee in here 12 some plates but never. the bowls to it but never this. So 13 that is not not -- 14 MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN But we did take half of 15 Wistollen Phonetic along the way 16 MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN No not even worthwhile 17 to mention but the loss of the family and of the friends 18 as showed you here these things in the newspaper when
19 outin
uJ 20 MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN Ad.
RT7JLTERGLUCKrANAdsin for looking for 22 them that speaks and thats more than everybody connects
23 inaudible 24 MR. HARRY GLUCKMAN think we have done it.
25 THE INTERVIEWER inaudible
Gluckman Family 80
MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN Its inaudible yeah but it was later on evidently it was famous the most THE INTERVIEWER Auschwitz
MR. WALTER GLUCKMAN Auschwitz. think that was the end of it. But we never could find out.
Interview concluded.
10
11
12
13
14
