United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Ellen Kaidanow
November 8, 2008
RG-50.030*0553 PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a recorded interview with Ellen Kaidanow, conducted by Cecilia Curbow on November 8, 2008 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview took place in Alexandria, VA and is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
ELLEN KAIDANOWPRIVATE
November 8, 2008
Question: This is the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum interview with Ellen Kaidanow, conducted by Cecilia Curbow on November 8th, 2008, at the Child Survivor Conference in Alexandria, Virginia. Hello, Miss Kaidanow.
Answer: Hello.
Q: Thank you so much that you have agreed to give us an interview.
A: You’re welcome.
Q: Would you please repeat your name and your date of birth?
A: Yes, my name is Ellen Kaidanow, that’s my married name, and I was born in 1936, in June s – June 15.
Q: Where were you born?
A: And I was born in Poland, which is now the Ukraine, and the name of my city is Dubno, d-u-b-n-o.
Q: Okay. So, how old were you at the time of the Holocaust?
A: At the time I probably was like seven years old?
Q: And your family consisted of how many people?
A: Yes, we were a family of five, I had three sisters, I was the middle daughter, and my father was – name was Joseph, or Jossul in Yiddish. My mother’s name was Esther. And I had a sister by the name of Pearl. I was the middle child, my name was Shifra in Yiddish, and then I had a younger sister that was Bella.
Q: Did you attended a school at the time?
A: No, I never went. I-I was supposed to – I remember that I was supposed to go that year to school when the Germans came in. So I never actually went to school.
Q: Were your other sisters on –
A: The older sister must have gone to school, but I really don’t know.
Q: Okay.
A: But I’m sure she did, because she was much older. Like, I was closer to the younger one, you know, and there was probably quite a few difference between the older and myself and my younger sister.
Q: And how – how many years are there in between your sisters and you?
A: I – I don’t know, you know, I’m just sort of imagining that sh – the older one must have been like at least three years older, because I remember her – you know, being that I was little, I thought she was big. But the truth is, I don’t know. And the younger sister was wa – not too – too much younger than I was.
Q: Okay, so wh-what do you remember about the [indecipherable]
A: About the home life I don’t remember too much. We lived in a very beautiful street by the name of Panienska. And I know that the fi – people who know anything about Dubno, and if you tell them Panienska street, they know that that was a very beautiful street. My parents had like a little – I would say they called it a kiosk, like they was having candy and things like that. So my parents were hardly at home. But they had one of – a – a – a Christian, actually a Ukrainian woman by the name of Lerna(ph), and she was raising us. She was really more like my mother – like a mother to me than my own mother, because she was always with the girls, my mother was busy in the store. So, I loved her very much, and she loved the children. She was very devoted person to us. And in fact, she was the one that saved me, at the end. So, too much about the life before that, I don’t remember too much. But I do remember when the Germans came in, and I’ll never forget one of my cousins came and they said, you know, you have to leave your home, and we have to all move to a ghetto, which was a Dubno ghetto. And then wi – all of – the whole family, like my mo – I remember my grandmother was there and my father’s brother also lived there, and they had many children, like at least four or five children. But I don’t remember, you know, their ages or their names, I hardly remember that.
Q: So they were all gather at the ghetto.
A: And – and they – we were all in the ghetto, and la –
Q: Okay. Ah – hah – sorry, just have a quick question, sorry.
A: No, it –
Q: How did you know that – I mean, you were seven years old, how did you know that this was the Germans? Did you also see local people involved in gathering Jewish people and taking them to the ghetto?
A: Well, to tell you the truth, I didn’t see Germans until I was in the ghetto, and then I did see Germans. They used to come every once in awhile, they would say – you know, they used to call it an oblava(ph), which means like – you know, they would decide that they would – gonna come into the ghetto, and let’s say, whoever was outside, they would kill. And I do remember seeing them.
Q: Did you recognize them in their uniforms?
A: Uniforms, yes.
Q: Okay. Were they a different color than other people? Was –
A: Well, it was the German uniforms –
Q: It was German.
A: I remember their hats, it was like a greenish uniform.
Q: Okay.
A: And, you know, people would alert us, so, the Germans are coming, so we used to hide.
Q: Oh.
A: Yeah.
Q: So, the ghetto, how many people of your family do you – do you recall more or less? I mean, a – yo-you just mentioned that you met there your aunts and –
A: Yes, yes, there was –
Q: – cousins.
A: – well, I – as I said, I don’t – I know he had a wife, and I know we had cousins, I don’t remember how many and how old they were. But, you know, I know we lived in the si – all th – all in the same house, you know, in – in the ghetto. And in the ghetto, I don’t know, I remember playing like outside a little bit with, you know, other kids. And – and then I also remember that m-my uncle and my father, they made like a hiding place. They called it a schron, which means like an underground bunker, I would say a bunker. And whenever there was rumors that the Germans are coming, or that the end was gonna come or whatever, we used to hide in that place. And once it was over, everybody came out. So I do remember that.
Q: And was it only your sisters and you that hid there, or was also the other –
A: No, e-everybody.
Q: – cousins, and –
A: Yeah.
Q: Okay, okay.
A: Everybody.
Q: Okay, so others as well?
A: Yes, yes.
Q: Okay. So, what happened afterwards?
A: What happened afterwards, of course you know the life in the ghetto was a – pretty miserable. I remember even I – I – I’ll never forget that one day we were outside and the Germans came, and I remember they took like a little kid, and they threw them in the barrel of water, like rainwater, you know, the barrels used to collect rainwater? And that image stayed with me for a long time. But what happened is, towards the end, I remembered also again, people came – well, first of all, you know my father was in touch with le -- Lerna(ph), that’s the nanny that I was telling you about. And what happened was, the ghetto was built by Jews, and they were built by planks, you know, there were planks? And they like left one plank open, and she used to come and ge – bring us food. And one time she actually came and said that she wanted to take me, and you know, to save me, and – and – and so on. And she did take me out of the ghetto, I don’t remember how, but I remember that my father was like crying when I left. And in the middle of the night, she took me to her place where she lived, not too far away from the ghetto.
Q: Do you know why – why you, and maybe not your younger sister, or your other sister, yeah.
A: I don’t know. I always wondered. I always wondered. That’s something that I always, always have in mind, why me, you know? But I think that what happened, that it was circumstances, because we – yeah, I don’t – I don’t know really why. But the first time that she took me out, in the middle of the night, I sort of got – got scared, you know, that I’m away from my parents, so I came back by myself, I don’t know how.
Q: How old were you still?
A: I’m maybe seven years old.
Q: Seven, okay.
A: And I came back and I still remember that at the ghetto gate, they used to have Jewish, I don’t know, I want to call them policemen, but guards, let’s say guards. And I still remember that one of them said, look at her, she’s coming from the outside and she didn’t bring anything. Cause all I did was, you know, just come home. And this Lerna(ph), who was the one that, you know, I was with, woke up in the morning and I was gone, and she was like really panicky. So she came to the ghetto and she said to my father, I don’t know what happened, I don’t have the child. And he said, don’t worry, she’s here. So that’s – I remained in the ghetto with my family, until the very end when they announced an akcja – an akcja mean – meant that they were liquidating the ghetto.
Q: This was in – was it years later, or –
A: Well, we were occupied in ’41, and this must have been, I don’t know. To – to tell you the truth, I don’t know exactly whether it was a year or two later.
Q: Okay.
A: Whatever the ghetto, you know, that probably could be documented. But I do remember that somebody came to my father and said, listen, Lerna(ph) is at the gate, you know, because we were all gated in. It’s not like today’s gated communities, yeah. And they said, you know, if you have a – a child, just, you know, throw her out, like bring her out. So I remembered like they picked me up physically and brought me to the gate. By that time the Germans were already – they were on their way to come to liquidate the ghetto. And she was waiting for me, she took me by the hand like this, and we started walking, just walking. And I – I don’t know, I was just very pliable, I guess, and this time I just went with her. And in fact, on the way – on the way, as we were walking, we were caught by the Ukrainian police, and we were taken into a pla – a room, and I remember sitting with her, just like today, like she was sitting and I was sitting. And the policeman was called away for some reason. There was a woman scrubbing the floor and she said, what are you sitting here? Go. He’s not here, get out of here. And so she took me again by the hand and she – we walked out of there, which was again a miracle, I guess in Jewish you would say bashert. And we just walked and walked and walked until we hitchhiked. We hitchhiked, and she had a brother that lived on a farm, I don’t know how many kilometers away, because I have no idea of things like this. We came to her brother, and I remember she put me up like in a part where, you know, nobody could see me. And I was there for maybe a week or so, I don’t know how long either, because I have no – I had no perception of time whatsoever. And after awhile the brother said to her, listen, you can’t stay here, because if they discover that you have a Jewess here, then you know what’s gonna happen, we’re all gonna get killed. So –
Q: Just a quick question again, sorry.
A: No, that al –
Q: Was this the house of her brother or were you in – in [indecipherable]. Was this a house, a farm?
A: It was a farm.
Q: It was a farm.
A: Definitely a farm. I’m – he lived there, you know, with his wife, I guess, and – and her mother was still alive, I remember that. You know, an older woman.
Q: So, were you allowed to go into all the rooms inside the house?
A: No, I – I was just like – they used to say, like an apprivichik(ph), I don’t know how to explain it, but they had like a wooden stove, and then on top used to be like warm, you know? And I remember s – being there, like cooped up, you know, hidden. And so she said, you know what? I’ll go back and I’ll see, because you know, she didn't know what happened. So I remember she went away for a day or so, whatever, I don’t know how long it took. And when she came back she said, I can’t take her back because nobody’s there any more, they’re all killed.
Q: So she went back to look for your family?
A: She went back to the family, to the ghetto, and the ghetto by that time was completely liquidated, nobody was there. So she came back and then she had another sister that lived also on a farm, but the farm was called the a houtur(ph) which means that it was isolated. It was like the farm, and then it was nobody all around, you know, not too many people around. So we stayed with that sister for quite awhile. And I don’t know what I was doing, I remember going out with the cows, or with the horses and you know, li – she had one son, and it was very good to me. I would – never had any suffering, I never had – I was never hungry, because on a farm, you know? And this woman, Lerna(ph) who took me, she was like crazy about me, and I loved her so much, that she was everything to me, you know?
Q: Right.
