United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Preben Munch Nielsen
April 16, 1999
RG-50.549.02*0040
PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of an audio taped interview with Preben Munch Nielsen, conducted by Katie Davis on April 16, 1999 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview took place in Washington, DC and is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
Interview with Preben Munch Nielsen
April 16, 1999 Beginning Tape One, Side A
Question: United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, Jeff and Toby Herr collection. This is an interview with Preben Munch Nielsen, conducted by Katie Davis, on April 16th, 1999, at the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, in Washington, D.C. This is a follow up interview to a USHMM videotaped interview, conducted with Preben Munch Nielsen on November 6, 1989. The United States Holocaust Memorial Museum gratefully acknowledges Jeff and Toby Herr, for making this interview possible. This is tape number one, side A. Will you just say your name, and tell us the date of your birth?
Answer: Preben Munch Nielsen, 13th of June, 1926.
Q: Can you tell us the name of your mother -- the full name of your mother and your father?
A: My father’s name was John Harry, and mother’s, Marea Dorethea.
Q: Can you spell that?
A: My father’s, John, J-o-h-n, Harry, H-a-double r-y, and my mother, M-a-r-e-a D-o-r-e-t-h-e-a.
Q: And were they also from the town that you were born in?
A: No, they -- I was born in Copenhagen, but my mother died rather young, and I was together with four cousins, and brought up together with -- with my grandmother, in Snagerstein. I was born in Copenhagen, in the hospital there, but lived practically all my life in Snagerstein.
Q: Di-Did you have any siblings?
A: Yes, a -- a sister.
Q: Her name?
A: Grethe, G-r-e-t-h-e.
Q: Okay. And when was she born?
A: In 1928, two years younger than I.
Q: Okay, okay, good. And c-can you tell me your grandmother’s name?
A: She was born in Sweden, and her name was Augusta, A-u-g-u-s-t-a.
Q: Was she ma -- a maternal grandmother, or mat -- paternal?
A: Paternal grandmother, my father’s mother.
Q: And what was her last name?
A: Em -- Nielsen, just like mine.
Q: So, you eventually took your grandmother’s last name?
A: No, that was my father’s last name.
Q: Oh, okay, okay.
A: My father’s name was the same as my grandmother’s.
Q: Okay. And can you tell me a l-little bit about what it was like when you were growing up? What -- What was your home like? What -- What did you do? This is maybe even before you went to school? What was it like living with your grandmother?
A: I cannot say that -- how it would be without her, because I’ve always known one life, and that was with my grandmother, and in a big family with -- with four cousin, which was more like brothers and sisters, and I had a very wonderful childhood. We lived in a big house, three stores high. My grandfather, he had passed away at that time, but he had -- had had a hotel in Elsinore, our neighbor town, and my grandmother was reasonable well off, and we had a wonderful life, and with much love. Of course that was -- might be a little bit more old fashioned. There were some thing which I saw later on, that our maids could do, that we were not allowed to do, but really we don’t miss it. We had a very nice, very beautiful childhood together.
Q: What were some of the things that you weren’t allowed to do? How was your grandmother old fashioned?
A: Five o’clock, was five o’clock, and when she had said something, she was a female dictator, so she was ra-rather strict, but I-I don’t remember any time she hit any of us. It wasn’t necessary, yeah. A blink with eyes, a finger lifted.
Q: [inaudible]
A: That’s okay. So -- But w-we were not a-afraid of something, no, no, no, no, but that was the way -- that was the rule of the house and they -- the rules we had might be -- was a little different from -- from others. There was also a generation, and different from the way our maids were brought up and the way we were.
Q: Well, your sister was there, so your grandmother was bringing up six children?
A: Yes.
Q: Okay. So she -- Tell me a little bit more about her. What was she like?
A: She was a very heartful lady. She did new -- what she could do for helping people. But still she had -- she was Swedish, so there a difference between Swedish and Danish. The Swedes are lay -- almost stiff, and -- in their way of life, and she came to Denmark, very youn -- young and married my grandfather and they made together this wonderful hotel, and -- and she has always been in a commanding position, and she was that to her last day. So -- But our home was full of love and we had all the things we wanted to have to play. We had the big garden. We lived in Snagerstein, that is three miles south of Elsinore. We had -- From our windows we could see over the sounds of Sweden. We -- Every summer, we -- we wot out swimming and sailing. We had the boat very near to us, so we had it, really, a wonderful life. So -- A-And she was, of course, the manager of all the things, who make it possible.
Q: You said that she was -- that she gave things, that she reached out to people. Can -- Can you talk a little bit about that, what you remember of her as you were growing up?
A: No, really, I dow -- just know that people came and -- and what -- what they got, I don’t know. But I know during the war, she was very helpful in many ways to people who had no clothes, because she gave, of course, what we ha-have left over -- be -- so, she -- she was very h-heartly in -- in her way of living. But the small details is difficult to remember.
Q: What do you recall about religion, growing up, or faith? Did you go to church, or were there any habits or rituals at home, that you recall?
A: My home was a typical Danish four wheel Christian life. You know, you go to church when you on f-four wheels, for baptism, for wedding, confirmation, funeral and Christmas eve. We were not -- Of course, we believed, but we were not church-goer, not church-goer. We -- No, I -- I really think that the only religious influence in the house was that grandma, every morning, 8:30, listened to the radio from the dume in Copenhagen, there was every day, a -- a 10 minute sermon. And that -- that was -- But, we were not church-goer. First of all, there was quite a long distance to church. And, by the way, my grandmother was not very fond of the minister. He was from what we -- I would call a very Orthodox, and very narrow minded part of the Danish church, called Internal Mission. That, you know, everything was prohibited, but you were allowed to put cream and shoke in the coffee, but not ter.
Q: Not to stir it?
A: Thas -- Hey wa -- Tha -- That’s the right, that’s right, that -- that part of -- of course it not -- not true with the coffee, but in that way, that everything was s-sinful. And that was too Orthodox for my grandma. And th-the sermons from the radio, that was something else, that was a more Reformed, and open form of religion. But, of course, the religions, the bages should be the same, bus all the outfits, which make the difference.
Q: What -- You’ve talked a little bit about the love in your household, and the -- the s -- the structure, the discipline. What else do you remember about values your grandmother taught you, or perhaps a sort of a philosophy, as you were growing up?
Q: There was no [indecipherable] kind of -- I really think that she thought that if we did what she did, it was okay [indecipherable] example. I -- I just think that’s -- that was her idea. She was not a -- a big thinker. We had too much to do, but she was a good pe -- a good -- a good woman, and we loved her, and so I have had a childhood which was quite out of this world. When I hear about what’s going on [indecipherable] well, that’s a -- I enjoy to think back a-at that time.
Q: What did your grandmother do all day? You said there was some financial resources, was she working at all, fro -- a garden, or anything?
A: I understand you are a young American. If you have tol -- as-asked this to -- to a Danish girl in that age, “I have six children, I have a big house, and you say wh -- ask what I do?” I really think that -- We had, of course -- There was an aunt living with us, a-and she was so wonderful, and wa -- that was my grandfather’s sister, never married, and was -- was the lady who took care of the kitchen and all this. And then we h -- always had a girl, a maid. But those ga -- a -- a big garden, you know. That was the only thing I hated, it was to pick up the leaves from the -- the -- the leaves of roses. That was a big, and a boring job. But there was a big garden, and my -- my grandmother was very interested in -- in gardens. So, she got plenty to do, plenty to do.
Q: I want to talk a little bit about politics. I mean, did -- did you ever hear politics discussed at the dinner table? What -- What were y -- her ideals, or perhaps even yours? At this point, you’re 13 -14 - 15. How were you getting some of your political ideas? A-A-And it doesn’t have to be specifically with a specific party, but just ideas about how things should be.
A: You see that, in Denmark, we ha -- for all the years when I was young, mixed government between the social democrats and a radical party. And, you must recall that, in the 30’s, after the Black Wednesday in ’29, Denmark had had very -- indeed, very bad economical conditions. A big part of our -- our export was agriculture, and the first -- everybody stopped in Britain, was our biggest market, that was agriculture products. So there was a really big unemployment in Denmark in the beginning of the 30’s, and there was, even then, not any tension t -- revolution or to Communism, all this, because there was a social welfare in Denmark. A social welfare, which was backed up even by the more conservative parties, so there was uni -- unity about -- to give the people who was not so good off as we, a helping hand. And after ’36, it turns a little bit, and in ’38, just before the war, we had a reasonable good situation, and of course the social democrat got the credit for that, and that is okay. And, at the same time, a certain Mr. Hitler, made his number in -- in Germany. We thought that Hitler was a clown. We und-underestimated that guy. His screaming, his completely directed reviews. He -- When we saw him in the picture -- the pictures of him, when we -- when we heard him in -- in the radio, on -- on film, or this newsreels, it was -- w-we couldn’t understa -- we really thought the man must be crazy. And that gave Denmark an injection against narcissism, because that was also completely foolish for us to believe that anybody are supermen. I never forget, we as Danes, was so -- the best of all the Aryans, with our blue eyes, our blonde hair, and -- and all this. And we couldn’t u-understand anything out of -- and therefore, in Denmark, there was a feeling of certainness, that that guy could never be a threat. That was ’36 - ’37. There was a -- that w -- I say, here was not something I knew that time, because as 10 years old, you are not that interest. But, the [indecipherable] was that when he had passed the bridge over Rhine, the river Rhine, and taking over the old German socketbeat without, and he was shooting at him. Maybe the whole world could have -- be something else today, this day in April, in ’99, where we talk about Kosovo. If somebody had shot at the German army crossing the bridges over Rhine in 1936, maybe millions of people had been alive today. I don’t know, but I say it because that gis -- my impression what’s right or wrong in Kosovo.
Q: Do you remember when you first began to form your own idea about Hitler? Do you remember listening to the radio, perhaps with your grandmother, or aunt, or perhaps other people, neighbors, or --
A: I can say the day exactly, the ninth of April, 1940, I woke up and -- because there was airplanes in the air. We had -- To see an airplane in that -- the -- in those days, that was something special, but here was lots of them, coming up from south, over the river Sund, and they were -- the destination were Norway, because that was the day Hitler occupied Denmark and Norway. And then they came back and they -- then went over Copenhagen, and we have heard about the bombardment of Wachau, in the year before, when the start of the war started, and afterwards, we got the -- the message that Hitler has threatened to bomb Copenhagen if we did not -- gave up and sign the treaty that let -- he should take over the power and -- and all this. And we had that time, 13,000 soldier, that was all, and somebody was killed at the -- at the border between Ge-Germany and Denmark. That day I got my impression what -- a man who have made a non-aggressive treaty with us, and broke it, that man was no good, and he was certainly not a clown, but he was a threat. And from the -- that day, I -- I despised the man, and the regime. But I think that goes for many, many, many. I was 13 years, that ni-ninth of April, and it was strange because I had to go to the station. I went to school in Copenhagen, that was a dri -- a drive of about an hour or so, and non -- in the train, I’ve heard about it. We have to -- seen the planes and all this, but when we came to the -- to Copenhagen, we had to stop one station before Norbel, and w-w-w -- had to go out of the train and up in the streets, we heard the German soldiers. And that was a shock. I was really in shock. And -- But we could do nothing. [indecipherable] dreams that you can have a gun and shoot, all that. Well, wund -- it became a normal day later. Where we lived, we saw no German soldiers. I saw them when I was a-at school in Copenhagen, and I really think Denmark is a sha -- I remember that’s the first time in all our history, we have lost all freedom. And I know it s-seems maybe a little pathetic, but freedom is something you don’t talk about, and don’t know exists until you lose it. Then you’ll find out what it means. This -- To live, one day in a country with law and order, the next in a country where you do not know what is law and order, because the other set up what you have to be and say, that is difficult. All this -- For instance, with the news. From one day to another, we just had one side of the news. And that was the main reason that we young people, of course, guided by grown-ups, came in -- very young in the illegal press work. As paper boys, we distributed -- and to me it was very clear. I went to school in Copenhagen, I lived on the country side in -- in Willet, so it was naturally I had some papers with me, and gave them to people who I knew would en -- would use them right, because that was all informations. W-W-We tried to listen to BBC, but the Germans make some disturbings jop, so it was very difficult. You should have seen all the antennas you tried to make, in order to get the news from BBC, three times a day. And, again, BBC was the truthful news media. But, maybe they’ll be just as muss -- misunderstandings from their side. Beeb -- The -- The German’s news from the different fronts, was always taken as 100 percent lies. But on the other side, in the fort -- in ’40, what happened? Holland, Belgium, France fell. Dunkirk. It was a very, very sad time. It was very difficult to keep up this stee. That was -- And our government, we had a government at that time, the-they make collaboration with the Germans, which we didn’t like. We -- We thought they were cowards. That’s easy to say when you are not sitting at the fir -- in the first row, but that was a very shameful feeling, that we have failed, that we now saw that England was very, very hard pressed, and there was none in Europe, who could help. Never forget that on -- in the ’40, they had still the pact between Stalin and Hitler. It was just -- there was no way out of it.
Q: C-Can -- Can you talk a little bit more about people felt about how your government reacted, and what they would have liked to have seen?
