United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Isadore Helfing
March 9, 1992
RG-50.042*0014 PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a videotaped interview with Isadore Helfing, conducted on March 9, 1992 in Beverly Hills, California on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
ISADORE HELFING
March 9, 1992
We're starting Brett.
Can you tell me what your transport and arrival at Treblinka was like.
It was mostly from my, from my hometown. Was picked up in those, in those trains you know where you they transfer cattle, stuff like that. Yeah.
Describe what it was like when they opened the doors. What you saw and how you felt and what you did.
The minute they opened up the door, I was facing right about two stories dead peoples right in front of it laying there. These were the people that came before dead right in the trains, in those uh trains, and they pushed them out because they did, they didn't have time to haul away because another train came in, and that's what it was, that I saw.
And what did you do?
What I did, I saw it, we're going all, that's it, and I see boys dragging dead bodies to the grave you know, and I jumped right in and start dragging those bodies just like I was one of them. And they were pulling it to the graves. And uh so this was about 3 or 4 o clock and you know and then the night rolls around, and I could not join them, so I hide, I was hiding myself between the bodies there, so...And then in the morning, I did start doing the same thing, but I see in that they count fifty people dragging those bodies in this particular time, and two or three were killed, they, they, they shoot them because they couldn't uh drag those bodies, got sick and so on. So I joined right into the group, and I became one of the people. So like in the morning they came you know, and they count out the people how many people uh, uh there were right among peoples there. If somebody is missing so they were looking what's happened, you know, maybe he escaped or something.
So you actually sort of broke into the...
Broken right into the to the crew, like I am one of it. Everybody was wearing the same, the same clothes like they were come, when they came in.
Now describe to me in detail if you remember it how Treblinka was laid out.
The way it's laid out? Well, we, they make you go the people in, in a little, like a little alley go and they say, "Man at right, woman at the left," and over there they had to take off the clothes, and they pushed them right into the gate, and while they're coming to the gate, they come this way, this way and they join together, and they just went, (clears throat) they just went, that time I didn't know where they go, but then, then they went to gas chambers, all together.
What was the camp like? Tell me about the buildings, how big it was, where you slept, tell me how everything was...
We slept in a bldg just like a barrack, you know. Was -------- floor, sand, and that's the way we were sleeping there in those barracks. This was in the beginning, the first two months when I was there. Later they built, you know, a barracks, where you can sleep like a, they call this
Bunks.
Bunks, yeah.
Tell me how the whole camp was, how many buildings there were, how big it was, where the gas chambers were, describe to me...
The gas, the gas chambers was about --------------. That was the size of a single garage, something like that. A garage, like that. And they, they pushed them in there, and you know, the Gest-the Gestapo and everything, crying and, people were, they didn't want to go in, they saw it, they, you know, they hit and they pushed each other right in, and they were standing up against ------------, and then they gassed them, and from the other side they were sliding them, they just slided out, and another group was taken into the graves. That was uh the beginning when I got there.
Tell me how long you were there, and how it changed over the course of the time that you were there. It did change what they put people in a mass grave, and then when the grave was filled up, and they saw with the -------------- a, a new low, something, they digged out the, the dead people from those graves, and put them in one place where a big fire was going, and they were burning the bodies that I, that was, this was all after a month or so, and they, the new people came they go right in and just throw right into the, to the gr--to the, it was a grave, but, but the fire was a special fire, that was burning there.
When you got there, how long had Treblinka been going?
Oh, I don't know, maybe, they was, was, they were building that Treblinka, it was about a month or three weeks. Most of the people was ,was from the Warsaw ghetto, they, they brought them from the Warsaw ghetto. To build the Treblinka.
Tell me about the transports, and was it organized, was it orderly, how long did it take, how often did they come. Describe to me what it was like.
I I didn't get it.
The transports, when a transport was coming in...
Yeah, oh you mean inside Treblinka, yeah?
Yeah, once you had been there for a while, and you were working...
Some, some transports has to, had to wait, couldn't get in because inside going in Treblinka was one track, and they put the one in they could not come in the other because was one track. So they were, sometimes they were waiting for hours, till this one pulled out empty and the other came in. This was go into late in the evening. Not at night.
Every day?
Every day.
What did the people think? Where did...
People, the minute they got into Treblinka, they saw what was going on, the dead bodies, and they, they were screaming, that, that's all, everybody was screaming, screaming, crying. The screaming, you know, and that was going on all day.
Was there a time when it was busier than other times or --------?
Yeah, sometimes they had a, sometimes they were waiting, and sometimes they just in and out and this ---------------went very smoothly that. Some of them, those trains came in, there was 80%, 90% dead, people were dead there. They kept them so long, for 2, 3 days, until they got in there, and there was, they, they had no water, no air or nothing, and they, they died right in the train. I --------------------dragged out bodies from trains, people, their heads were that big, and the, from the heat there.
Tell me the story of how you were picked up, and when you were picked up, and then transported there.
We, I went together a, when they came in the morning, in uh my hometown, the ghetto, and they, they ordered everybody out from the houses, this was in the ghetto, so we all took packages, you know, bags, and sit right in the corridor, in the house there, because this was, you know, the people lived all the way around in the house, it's like a court. And then about 8 o clock, 8:30, we had to, they told us to go out and go to file, to march right there, maybe about a mile from my house went to the, to go to the trains. So we all went together, so they picked me up from the, from the group on the side, so they picked up uh 2, 2, 300 people, and put them in a different, in a different barrack, and they, and they, they need the people to work in the city, so I remained as a worker, but I didn't work. The next day was another transport. I got out from the, from the group, and went into --------, to the, to the transport because we didn't know we were going, and I said to myself, my parents were not going to be survive 24 hours if I wouldn't be there. You know, the, the people they -------------age, you know, uh, take care of them, you know. So I went, uh, ----------------by myself in and then we got into Treblinka. They kept us a whole day in a big filth, till they pushed us in to, to the, to the, those trains, what do you call the train, I call it that, where they carry the, the cattles, and the...
Cattle trains.
Cattle trains.
All right now describe for me again, the arrival in Treblinka.
We arrived at Treblinka just the way I, I told you before. They slided up the door, or, open the door, and they told them, "Go right in here, this, this way." And of course there was a little arch, says, woman right, and they go to, you know take a shower and stuff like that, and then they got into at the little field?? there, everybody had to get undressed. They didn't keep the people o-overnight. (Cough) The, the whole thing has to be finished up, the whole train, and they put them in the gas chambers, and, and the other side was another group, hauled them away, to the graves.
We're going to run out very soon.
Tell me what kind of a camp Treblinka was, and how it differed from other concentration camps.
From Treblinka was previously a death camp. Nobody was used for any uh hard labor or anything, just, labor was just with bodies, pulling people from from the, from the train, and uh, taking out different things, but they, of course, some people, girls, if you worked in a laundry there, not for us, just for the, for the, for the, for the Ukraine, the Germans, and of course, there was a kitchen there, in there, (cough) a shoemaker, a tailor, a little, a little quarter with all the shops, and a blacksmith, you know to put shoes on the horses, they had horses there too, and they used the horses just to bring the, they didn't have cars, so they used the horses to go in a little town to bring supplies for the, for the Germans. -------------. Yeah...
Tell me how many of you there were, and how many Germans there were, how many Ukraines there were.
By the, by uh, there, there was about, about a thousand, twelve hundred people, but uh, by the end was between 13 and, and 15 hundred people in that camp. Working.
Who were all of them? Were they all, they were all prisoners like you?
Yeah, --------the same here???
All right, now I want you to tell me again how you managed, what you did, when the doors opened. Tell it to me as though you didn't tell me before, how you managed not to go through one of those gates, and go into...
You know, when the train arrived, you know, like they do in the, they pushed, opened up the door, not open doors, were sliding, you know, and, and this, in the most, like I, I say, the most of them came from other towns. Happens to be from my time when I came out the, most people got sick there, but not didn't die, but the most trains came in and people were laying dead. And the, and there was a group of the people, that's what I did, pulled out the people, and that why piled up a big pile of dead people because the next train is coming out. They had no time to haul away. And uh, and farmers around, around the neighborhood had a, there was a, they made a law, they should, should bring a buggy and a horse, and, and leave it at the, at the gate at Treblinka. In the evening, they, they, they picked it up, the horse and the buggy. So we used the buggy and piled them on the, on the little, little buggy, and uh some people were dragging dead people without the buggy. Was so many people, you know. Because the grave was a, was away about uh about 500 yards, 400 yards, from the, from the train, from the railroad. And that's why I,I survived.
Now tell me about your conscious effort to survive. Tell me what you decided to do...
We knew we're gonna die any minute, but at that time, you know, you just, you became one of, one of the, you know because, not a human being, you know. I was, I was afraid to kill a fly, and here I had to lay between the bodies and pull the bodies, and it just became like a nonsense you know, like, like, not like a human being. And this was in the beginning, but then, then I do it, I did some something different.
What kinds of different things did you do? Did you have friends there?
No friends, uh, we, we all became friends. Uh, doesn't make a difference. One is from this town, this town, and practically everybody was almost uh my age. You know, they picked up these young boys, you know, 19, 20 years, 18 years, all, you know, about, about 20, 22, 23, very-----------we found one there. So that was too old at that time. And we saw this and then the, the camp got organized and what happened, how do I got survive, so I would work in a lot of things there, I was hauling water. You know, there was a little, whatever you call this, well, you know, you picked up the water, and, and, and carried to the kitchen. I was working on that and maybe a couple weeks, and then one time they picked up a bunch of people. See they separated Treblinka. Was too, the, the, the camp was number two anyways. Number, I'm not talking about number one, but at the number 2 camp, they separate, they put the, at the gate the, was when, when you came out from the gas chambers, there's another group hauling the bodies, and put into the graves. And those people, with this people didn't got together, they was, was in the same field, the same people were running there, the SS and the and the Ukrainians, what we didn't got together. One time they picked me up, and you know, we had to, every morning you had to pull out all the people and they counted how many people were here. Otherwise, there were two or three missing, they know somebody escaped, and they punished and that and that for that. Punished other people, not, not who escaped. So, one time they picked about 20 or 30 people from this group and took them to the other side where they pulling people to, to the graves, and I thought over there, I cannot survive 48 hours. The next day, when I, then they make me hauling water, and the water was at the other side where the train come in, this part of Treblinka, and I saw what's going on, and, and I see them crying and is not looking at me, they just went to somebody and talked. I left the two, the two barrels of water, and got into the, back to the same group that I was before, and started working so that's why and then I got back into the same group. Over there, there was food because people came to Treblinka, and somebody had a piece of bread and that and that, so you, you picked it up, you found the food to eat there. And over the other side, there were, you were dealing just with the dead bodies, and this, I was, was uh people just arrived. They left the clothes everything, over there, just plain dead bodies. So I got back to this thing, and, and that's why, and then I remained there in the, the, stay with the --------, I changed the job, they would have killed me right on the spot. But we knew anyways we gonna be killed, nobody's gonna survive. So, it happens like this. The way I survived is like this. In that camp there was a, a, a horse, and a, and a two-wheel buggy, which picked up garbage, you know and, and wor--picked the garbage and took it to the grave where the people were burning, and he backed it out and, and dumped it the garbage and for burning. There was no trashcans, uh something to haul away, everything that went into the grave and to burn it. Nobody had cans there or anything, there was not such a thing what uh, this is going to burn, not going to burn. So, what happened, when the guy pulled back the horse, told him the, the horse, pushed him to go backwards, the horse got wild, and backed it up, and went in right to the pile with the buggy. And then the, the German was, was around to see what's going on. He shoot him. There was a stable. There was five horses. And they used the horses for, for horseback riding and two horses for going for, for, to bring this materials you know, the food from the, from the other towns for the Germans. So they need an another guy, and it happens to be, I was in the barracks with a guy, who worked in the stable, cleaned the horses, the uh, uh feed the horses, he said, he said, "You're going to be good???" And I substitute the other guy who got killed. ----------- And account of that thing, I survived in Treblinka. I, from then on, I had nothing to do with the people with the, working by the dead people. I just used the horse, and I learned how to clean horses and feed them and water. There was no ------------, we had to go the well and get the water. And this fellow, happens to be, was a few years older. And that Ukraine, was a an Ukraine who was in charge of that stable. When he got to the town, he got for himself, uh food you know. All those uh salamis and vodkas and that, so I have uh as far as food is concerned, I was eating then it was, it was okay. And then he want me to drink some vodka. I didn't touch it, and the guy said, "Don't you touch it." I don't know if, if they, they came in and they see you a little, little drunk, you be killed, and I was listening to him, and that's why I survived. That's why I survived that long to be in Treblinka.
Did you have Kapos in Treblinka?
Yeah.
Tell me what a Kapo is.
There, there was one of my kapos, he was a young fellow, he was, he came a little earlier, and his name, -----------his name is Monek, I can't say, because we call him that, I remember that. He acted, well, uh, the, the, the Gestapo is rough to the people, but he didn't harm people. He didn't harm nobody, this particular guy. So there was about, about 2 or 3 kapos, but he was my kapo, this particular guy.
We have to reload.
Tell me about the uprising. Tell me all about the whole plan and then go right through it.
So, I was the one who knew we're gonna have the uprising because they came to the stable and they told me, "Listen, this is going to be an uprising." But happens to be, was a little boy, was really young, his father was there with him in a tailor shop, and happens to, he was from my hometown. Happens to be was from my hometown. That little boy was a shoeshine boy in, at the barracks where the, where the Germans were, uh, living there. So, and, and over there they had the supply of ammunition there. Supply, and he had a way of ,of going in. He brought out a lot of, stole a lot of ammunition, he distribute, distributed to some people who knows how to handle it. Not everybody in the camp knew there's going to be an uprising. And I was told, when you hear the uprise...when I hear the uprise, I should grab the rifle from the Ukraine because he had a rifle laying there openly, you know the, I got the access to it all the time, but he didn't care because I been there a few months there. So, they told me that if you hear the uprise, grab that rifle and run with us in the uprising. So, and the, and the, and the people from the, from the barracks, what they used to tailor shoes shoemakers and, and a, if in this particular time, 11 o’clock, if any of the Gestapo comes in there to, to the room there, to the, to the place, grab him, choke him, he cannot say I would just kill him there because the uprise is, is 11 o’clock. Somehow it did delayed, and the people who knew about it didn't know what to do. So the uprise was a little later, and maybe 2, 3 of the Germans were killed, and then we start running. The wires, you know, the wires around the barracks, was not electric. In Treblinka they didn't make any tattoos on your arms. You wear the clothes which you wear all the time. That was, that's the way this camp was like that. So, so we run, we start running and I jumped across the wires, and the, and the, and the, the people you know, the, the patrols start shooting left and right, and I was running in the field and I saw it how the bullets popping in the in the ground in front of me. And then we got into the, then it got dark and I got into deep woods because we, from the distance we see black, this was woods. We were running straight into the woods. And we hided out overnight. So, and so the, the next, the next day, we didn't know where to go what to go. I saw a little farm, a farmer, all by himself. I was with another guy. And we got into his place, and we told him the story, and he kept us, hiding, uh hiding, but later he used us as to help him work, and this was uh, I don't know what to say now...
Tell me how big an escape it was. How many of the inmates were involved. How many do you think got away and then what happened after that.
It got away a handful. The rest all of them were killed right on the spot.
How do you know of that? How did you find out----?
Because after the war, we tried to get together how many people survived. Was only 27 people from Treblinka. From both camps, the camp where I was called Treblinka 2. There was another one, a labor camp, they chopping woods there, they're making roads. All together was 7, 27 people. After the liberation.
How many people did you kill during the uprising?
Nobody. I was running.
How many did inmates kill in general?
It it got, the inmates killed or, or the Germans killed?
How many of the Germans got killed?
About two or three. Yeah.
Now go back to when you were in the camp, and tell me about any sabotage that you did or that other prisoners did.
There was two prisoners tried to escape at night. Tried to uh, uh throw up under the wire, and they were caught. And they brought them right into the appel in the morning when we had the appel for counting out the people. They, they hang them right in the middle, everybody should see what's happened when they, they hang them up by their legs. And they were screaming and swearing. They want to be shot. They can't you know they ------------. And then they showed us a sample if we ever, if we do uh run away, that's what's going to happen to us. And then a guy didn't behave himself, they uh and they showed at the appel where we were standing, uh, uh get, 25, you know there was a a heavy belt over his back, and some of them couldn't even make it af-after that. They went with a big -----------. And of course there was a, a guy, g--we called him uh Lalka, he was uh, his face looked, Lalka is a doll. His face was like a doll, but he was a murder, I said this, this guy, he went with a, had a German shepherd walking around, and he didn't like the other guy walking, just to tell the dog and just tear him apart. He was just dangerous this guy. Just dangerous this guy. And at the appel, there was another guy, we called him Kivi. His name was not Kivi, we just gave him a nickname, and looked like a, a Jewish typical guy, you know, the way his nose was, was raised and stuff like that, and he was terrible that guy. I think this guy got killed. This guy, I found out from the guys, after, after the, the war was over. And there was many thousand things, I could not even think, maybe if I lay down in bed and think about it, I can give you twice as much.
Tell me about when you went back and walked through the camp and how, what you remembered about where things were.
Back, what, Yeah, when you went back recently in the last ten years.
Oh yeah, nothing there, nothing. They made, made a big statue there, and, and then they where the grave was with a where they were burning the people, they put uh stones you know memorial stones, and, and pointed out this Warsaw, my hometown, all the towns where people came into Treblinka, every town. It's just like mushrooms sitting there on a big spot, and, and the and the gas chambers, they poured uh asphalt, just to make known this was the gas chambers. A big, a big line, but you know, but that was the size of a, whatever the size is of the of the gas chambers. It's laying on the ground. They poured asphalt like this and they, there was the, the gas chambers, and this is the spot, was the spot, was the size of it. And the rest, everything is filled. Pine trees is growing up.
Did you and other prisoners talk about getting even while you were there. I mean, at night when you weren't working, were there...
You mean in Treblinka?
Yeah.
Oh yeah, there was a one fellow, one appel, it was right in front of me. A guy went in and stabbed the guy who count the people and then they ss-they sprayed him bullets, and our people from the group, a lot of people ------------too, same time. The guy knew he's gonna die, so he took uh revenge you know, and stabbed him right in the back and killed him. This was during the time I was at, I swear, was in the app--appel means that everybody gets off before they go to work and they count them out how many people is here, how many went at night to sleep, and in the morning if anybody is missing. They didn't want nobody to escape there.
So he he killed a German?
He killed a German. And he was shredded from bullets that that guy who did it. But he knew it, he went for ------------. Yeah, night, night came in with the train. There, there was a lot of people tried to get out of the train so they behind they, they, they grabbed, they tried to go underneath, underneath the train. When the train goes back out, then he can run out and escape. And all of the sudden, one is going through so everybody seeing that whoever was capable, done the same thing. When the German saw it and he shoot him right there under the, you know behind right by some kind of item so he can hang on to it, and the train would go out and, and he, then he would try to escape. People tried to escape when they were sorting the, the goods, you know, the clothing, and packing during the day into the train. So other people got stuffed in, got inside, and they jumped during the time when the train was going, I don't know where the train was going, but there was the clothing, people's clothing, and they jumped out into, through the little window.
All right, we're going to run out.
In other camps when people arrived like at Auschwitz there was a selection made, and mothers and children, and people of 50 and over were often killed, but people who were able to work were chosen for work and for life. Describe to me how arrival at Treblinka was different.
Well each camp probably was a different system. What, what, what did they have, I never heard it.
They had selections. Were there selections at Treblinka?
No, there was Treblinka no selections whatsoever. They didn't took out any people.
