United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Hannah Kalman
May 20, 1999
RG-50.106*0118 PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of an audiotaped interview with Hannah Kalman, conducted by Esther Finder on May 20, 1999 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview took place in Rockville, Maryland and is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's volunteer collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
HANNAH KALMAN
May 20, 1999 Beginning Tape One, Side A
Question: This is a United States Holocaust Memorial Museum volunteer collection interview with Hannah Kalman, conducted by Esther Finder on May 20th, 1999 in Rockville, Maryland. This is tape one, side A. Mrs. Kalman, what was your name at birth?
Answer: I can – I couldn’t hear you, what you said.
Q: What was your name at birth?
A: The name I was, Hannah Kalman. Hanka Kalman.
Q: What was your maiden name?
A: Hanka Feiner(ph).
Q: When were you born?
A: 1912, I have to go with this, yeah.
Q: And where were you born?
A: I wi – I s – I was born a very small city, Opoczno.
Q: In what country?
A: Poland.
Q: Is that where you grew up?
A: Yes, but my father moved out from this little town on account of school, to have more school for us, yeah. So we moved to mon – to Lódz.
Q: How old were you when you moved to Lódz?
A: I t – about 12 years.
Q: What do you remember about the first 12 years of your life?
A: First of all, when I came to Lódz, I looked for company because I didn’t got nobody, so I walked in to Goldonya(ph), Zionist organization, this was for – for young chil – for young people. I worked for Keren Kayemet for a long time. I collected a lot of money, yes. And my father was a very religious man, so I had to do this without of knowing my father didn’t like it because he was waiting for Messiah.
Q: Can you explain Keren Kayemet for me?
A: Keren Kayemet’s money was going to Israel because they didn’t took one inch from the Arabs for nothing, they paid for everything with the money what we collect, Keren Kayemet.
Q: Can you tell me your parent’s names?
A: My father’s name was ye – Jakov Feiner, my mother’s name was Rifka Feiner.
Q: Did you have any brothers or sisters?
A: Yes, we got eight childrens. Five boys, three girls.
Q: Can you tell me their names?
A: The youngest sister mines was Rushka(ph), or – or in Polish, Rachel. And Sarah was the third sister. The – the brother was Herzkel(ph), Avram(ph), Moishe, Chaim, Vervel(ph).
Q: What did your father do for a living?
A: This I have to explain to you. We were working, making out all kind of skins. In Polish was the skarbosz(ph). All kind of skin, soles, everything, but in my time, when I was a young girl, we were wear – wearing shoes from leather. So this was our – my father was a very comfortable – it was a – we got a comfortable life.
Q: Can you tell me about your mother?
A: About my mother, she was a very religious woman, but very elegant, va – very modern. She kept us in a pri – private school. She built up a beautiful home.
Q: When you were a child, what were relations like between the Jews and the non-Jews in Poland?
A: I couldn’t hear, a little louder talk to me.
Q: What were the relationships like between the Jews and the Gentiles in Poland?
A: Ver-Very, very bad, because I went one year to the Polish school, so I was bitten and I was abused, even the teacher. They were playing cat and mouse, ara – so I asked – I asked the teacher, can I go in? She said no. I said why? Don’t you know why? And this – we – we paid taxes for this school. This was five grades Jewish – Jewish public school. So when the – when the – the priest or the director se – some fo – somebody from the officials came in and I go – I got red eyes as he came over to me, he said, did you got trouble, Hanka? I said yes. I said – so I told him about the teacher, so they changed the teacher.
Q: Tell me about your education. What kinds of things did they teach you in school?
A: I got – seven grades I got in – no, I finish the seven grades in Lódz and later I went to high school. All the three girls got – finished – graduate, but my youngest sister graduate in ghetto high school. Rumkowski gave her the diploma.
Q: When you were a little girl, what did you think you wanted to be when you grew up?
A: This I have to tell you the honest, I was childish, I never was thinking what – what – for the future because I saw my parents are comfortable, so I wasn’t thinking of anything.
Q: You mentioned several times that your family was religious –
A: Very.
Q: Can you tell me some of the religious traditions that you observed and some of the holidays and how they were observed?
A: From all the holidays you want to know? I can tell you today, I still can’t forget the nice table for – prepared for Shabbas, for Friday night, for the holidays, for Purim, for Pesach, I never can forget. Everything was beautiful. Silver – silverware, we got china from – from Czechoslovakia, my father was traveling, so – and my father liked antiques, so he bought beautiful things. So we got the table, I never can forget. The worst thing is for me when it’s coming a holiday.
Q: When you were a little girl, did you have a favorite holiday?
A: Yes, yes, yes, we got – we were – we – I was very religious too. I am still a little bit, but not like I was because after Auschwitz, they took away my little boy. I can’t be like I was. Yes, I was very religious by myself, because I was raised like that. Before school, in the morning I have to say a pray, and by each meal a pray – after each meal a pray. Saturday I was praying like – like everybody, at – and Sunday I was praying – no, Sunday we got school.
Q: You mentioned a few moments ago that when you first moved to Lódz, you became involved with Keren Kayemet.
A: Yes. Yes, I were 12 years old. I was collecting money in the street. I was going with the puszko(ph) and asking people for – for – for – donations. So they put in a quarter, 10 cents, 20 cents, some of a – a zloty. I collect a lot of money, yes.
Q: Did you participate in any other activities with this group?
A: No, the most – the most I was – were in Goldonya(ph), and later when I got older, I went into – Nathan(ph), was what the name? Goldonya(ph)? Yehtaktut(ph). It was Yehtaktut(ph). So in the Yehtaktut(ph) I worked still for Keren Kayemet, yes. Til the war start, I worked for Keren Kayemet. I was a good collector, I didn’t missed one door. I knocked on each door.
Q: Were you a Zionist?
A: I am, yes.
Q: Did you have any thought of leaving Poland and going to Palestine in those days?
A: Yes. Yes, yes, but my father was very religious so he said, what you want to go to Israel? The girls and the boys, they get very, very – the short pants, he said naked. We very – we have to wait til mos – Messiah will come, we will go to Israel. If my father would listen to me, we w-would say – because we got money, we would able that time to show the 5,000 dollars and to go to Israel, but my father was very religious, he was waiting for Messiah.
Q: When you were a young girl, before the war, what did you do for – for fun or for entertainment when you were not in school and not in services?
A: So the organization was by us everything. We enjoyed, we were dancing and we were reading and we got the conversations. Yeah, wa – I was very busy with – with the – with the org – ar – we – ah – organization, very busy. To 10 o’clock til 10:30 in the evening. Lot of people came from Israel, they were te-telling us stories how Israel is building up and about the kibbutzim, and this was very interesting for me, so I was – the whole my life I spent til the war time, in – in the Zionist organization. Ben-Gurion came to us and I was – I was giving red roses. I was that time, I think 16 or 17 years old, he came to – to Lódz. And we walked with him in the middle street and he was telling us how much Israel is building up, how everything is good in the future, we need only – how you say … ground – ground workers, I forgot the name. Fin – in the fields, to work in the fields out the – this [indecipherable] that he [indecipherable] for hours to prepare, and my hu – and my husband was on Hasharah(ph). And when he was a boy, he was for free, ba – about 17 - 18 years old, or maybe 20, he went to Hasharah(ph) and the war start, so he had to wake up, if not we would – were – were – got ourself – we got to go to Israel.
Q: You mentioned a husband, can you tell me about this?
A: About my husband? My husband is from a very religious family, his father got semicha to be a rabbi. Not a rabbi, a rav. A rabbi is not a rav. A rav, he can manage a city, but not a rabbi. A rabbi doesn’t have to have semicha. A rabbi, if he is educated and it’s going from the nation – then from-from family to family, he can take over. But a rav must be special teached in Talmud, very high, to became semicha. So my father – my hu – my husband’s father got semicha.
Q: Explain to me what Hasharah(ph) is.
A: Hasharah(ph), the pa – they were preparing the young childrens to be – to work. Any kind of work, building and how you saying, th-the fil-fil-filds – field a – work – an-any kind, only to work. And he was starving, they didn’t got nothing to eat over there. And so my husband was trying to make a little business. So this way they got a piece of bread to eat, and he was in the Hasharah(ph) and he was from a comfortable home, too. In the middle, the war st-start.
Q: Tell me your husband’s name.
A: What – what?
Q: Your husband’s name.
A: Nathan Kalman(ph). The name was Kalmanowicz(ph), but we short the name here by the first citizenship. So the judge asked us, because the spelling was very hard for us, so we short the name for Kalmonowicz(ph) of Kalman.
Q: And how did you meet him? How did you meet him?
A: Well, I was with my husband in the organization, yes.
Q: Before the war began, were you aware of events in Germany? Things like Kristallnacht?
A: Before the war, my father told us about the first war. The Germans were so nice, the Germans were giving a little bit food for the childrens and everything. But this, what happened, I didn’t know. I was thinking the Germans are nice people. But I didn’t got no business with Germany. I learned a little bit, I got five – five grades German, yeah, because my father did business with Danzig and with Bydgoszcz, so over there my father was – he’d meet Germans, so I was doing the writing for my father. So I know a little German, not perfect.
Q: In the Zionist group, was there ever any talk about how Jews were being treated in Germany before the war?
A: No, but sh – very shortly before the war, came – don’t remember the name. Hold aside, I’ll ask my husband. Nathan(ph), what was the name from the man what he came to the park the first time to tell us, it’s – huh?
Q: Let’s take a break for one moment. Okay, we’re back.
A: He got a speech in park Helenow(ph), beautiful park. So I still remember what he said. Jews, over our head are big clouds. Who can help himself? Let – leave Poland. When I came home, I was afraid to tell my father I was listen – I was going to listen his pitch, so I told my father ahead they’re saying about it’s going to happen like this. My father said, nobody knows, only God knows.
Q: When did you get married?
A: I got married about 21, in Poland. My husband was in concentration camp and I was in a concentration camp and after the war we meet each other.
Q: What year did you get married? What year did you get married?
A: What year? 19 nine – 1936 or – ’36 or ’37.
Q: What else can you tell me about your life before the war?
A: Before the war I got the comfortable life of my parents and my – they teached us all the religion – religion. But my father want us to be educated because he was not comfortable – he – my father was in big business, so all the time he was – he was asking us for help, so for this he moved out from the little town to give us a little more education. I didn't worked, and we got a – our help had too, because eight childrens. In the little town we got like a little farm, only for us, not – not for business, so – so we got the cow, we got horses, we got everything. This place is still to na – today there. The Gentile people are living in there. This was my grandfather’s pla – this place was – was – my father wa – grandfather was that time, before the war, a very rich man, because he bought a – a bi – a big piece of land and he was building for each son, two rooms and a little factory like a gar – garbage, because this was the best business, it was very good business. And this is still today, and I would like this to give to Israel. Over there is a f – is ba – ba – 15 houses with the – yeah, but a – my brother was visiting, so a Gentile lady came out from our house. This is in Opoczno.
Q: You mentioned you got married in 1936 or 1937 –
A: ’37, I think, think in ninet – 1937, I think so.
Q: Where did you and your husband live?
A: In Lódz. Before the war, in Poland, yeah.
Q: And how did you support yourselves?
A: I got a little – a li – a – a –my husband was ma – how na – doing business with – in the paper business. And I got the little grocery store, yeah.
Q: Did you work until the beginning of the war?
A: No, I – I was only – after the war I start to help a little bit, but before the war, my father – my – my parents were very comfortable, so I didn’t – I didn’t work. And then, in Poland womens didn’t work that – like in the United States. Was very hard for us to find a job. First of all, if I asked for a job they ask me right away, wyznanie? Wyznanie means religion. So I had to say Mojsze szewego(ph), Mojsze. So they said okay, we will send for you. We will have a work, the – now – we now don’t have work. We will send for you. Til today they sending.
Q: You said that when they asked your religion, you said Mojsze. You mean –
A: Well, Mojsze’s – yeah, Mojsze, yeah.
Q: Can you explain that?
A: The – the ne – the – how to write Mojsze?
Q: Can you explain wh – what that means, the expression –
A: Religion, the religion was not Jewish, only Mojsze szewego(ph).
Q: So that’s how Jewish was –
A: Yes, yes, if I said Mojsze szewego(ph) they know I am Jewish.
Q: I’m going to pause to check the machine, one moment. Okay, I would like to ask you about the very beginning of the war. What was your first experience with the war?
A: This was Friday. They came in on Friday, 1939. So we were staying and greeting the soldiers that came in. One soldier gave my little boy, he was two years old – no, he was a year old – two years the [indecipherable] – yeah, about two years old. Yes, they gave him a little flower, to my little boy. So I was thinking what [indecipherable] like people talking. They are nice – nice people. But two, three days left – after, 10 Jews was hanged in Baliterini-rinik(ph) -- Barliskarinik(ph) to show us the beginning. Right away they – they took us to work. My little boy was a whole day in the home, he was crying, because he was afraid of the Germans, and he didn’t saw me back, so he was thinking I’m – I’m – I wouldn’t – I wouldn’t come never back to him to see him. I was washing floors, I was washing clothes, I was washing toilets and I was beat – got – I go – one soup they gave me for the whole day, and beaten, too.
Q: Tell me about your little boy.
A: My little boy, what can I tell? The til – two years I raised him like a mother should raise a baby. But in the wartime I gave my little boy my bread to eat because he couldn’t eat his soup. The soup was water with – with – with cabbage. I kept him in bed, because the water, it was freeze – it was frozen in our house, so I kept him in bed and I put a tray with a coloring book, with crayons, so he was a little bit busy. He falled asleep a little bit. And I got on a bench a piece of bread with a little bit – we got rations – a little bit sugar. When I came home this little bread was laying, he didn’t ate. And he got sick, he got a hole in the right side and the left lung, in ghetto.
Q: Before we go to the ghetto, let’s – I want to stay first with your son. When was he born?
A: He was born 19 – 1938. Yes, 1938 my son was born. In January, 25th.
Q: And your son’s name? What was your son’s name?
A: My son’s name was Jakob(ph), after my father and after my husband’s father, Jakob(ph) Moishe.
Q: How long after the Germans came, were you in – either put in, or did the ghetto form around you? How long were you allowed to stay outside of a ghetto?
A: 1940 they closed the ghetto. We saw they building something, but nobody was able to understand what – what’s going to go – happen. So f – 1940, everybody got to move into the ghetto, and the ghetto was closed.
Q: When did you go into the ghetto?
A: The same everybody, the same time. The same time, the 1940, the day I can’t – can’t remember, but 1940 when they closed the ghetto, everybody had to move to the ghetto.
Q: How were you notified that you’d have to move?
A: They came in, the SS came into the house and in five minute – in five minute and raus, raus. Yes, I couldn’t take nothing.
Q: It – could you please tell me when you first came into the ghetto how you found housing and how you got yourself organized?
A: The beginning from the ge – in the ghetto we still were able to have a bread, to buy a bread, a little bit like – like black market, a little bit more. But in no time was gone, no more bread. So we got rations in ghetto. For seven days each of us got a bread and a little bit [indecipherable] a little bit oil, a little bit – the sugar, not all the time. So we got a little bit – th-the whole ration was Sunday, and they gave this for a whole day – for a whole week.
Q: Tell me about your living conditions. Where did you live?
A: In ghetto? The living conditions in ghetto was very bad. The water was frozen in the house. We didn’t got coo – kid – stoves to cook, so – and the – so we got places what they got gas, little gas stoves. So we were taking tickets or staying in the line, and this way I was cooking a little bit water with – with [indecipherable] with – with the potato, that’s a soup for me and my little boy. I lived together with my sister what had a little boy. She was younger with two years from me.
Q: Did you have a space all to yourselves, you and your sister and the children?
A: I can’t –
Q: Did you have a room to yourselves, you and your sister and the children?
A: One room, two beds. In one bed my sister with her little boy, in other bed I went – I am with my little boy.
Q: Where was your husband? A: Oh, in – in – in-in Chenstahof(ph). He was – the-the – they caught him and – and – bu – at work, he worked. They caught him then, they sent him away.
Q: Did you have any idea where he was?
A: No.
Q: I’d like you to tell me about the ghetto. I’d like you to tell me if it was an open ghetto or a closed ghetto?
A: Closed ghetto.
Q: How was it closed?
A: You couldn’t work any, you couldn't walk out. And they build bridges you couldn’t – you couldn’t pass the street, across the street. They build bridges the tree – th-three – how you saying? The first floor – three floors. A bridge to go up, and later down. So we – you got cross the street. In the wintertime was terrible, because th-the snow was sticking to the – th-the shoes. And we walked up the steps, another one got killed, another one got fell down.
Q: Was there a wall or a fence around the ghetto? A wall or a fence around the ghetto?
A: Wires.
Q: Who were the guards?
A: The SS was in the middle watching us, and we got the sidewalks. And they shoot – they shoot people walking, innocent people only that they wa-was passing, they shoot them.
Q: Was the SS inside the ghetto? Were they inside the ghetto?
A: They were inside the ghetto, but they were – we were – they wa – we got wires, so we got only the sidewalks and he was walking in the middle of this [indecipherable] the streetcars passed, yeah, yeah.
Q: Did anybody guard the inside of the ghetto?
A: This I have to tell you the honest, some people yes, but they were hung. They kept us cigarettes because they were able still to come back and to bring something from outside the ghetto. But some people, yes, yeah, they worked ou-outside the ghetto. But later they closed, nobody was – nobody was able to go there.
Q: What was your work assignment in the ghetto?
A: From the beginning they – they took us to – the daughters to the [indecipherable], but later they opened Russolds(ph). Russolds(ph) is like factories. So I worked in corset in rug – Russold(ph), in aprons. This was Beebus(ph) Russold(ph), Seegul(ph) Street, Ba-Barlitta platz, Barlutzkarinik(ph), in Seegul(ph) Street. So I worked there two years, I think, yeah. So we got only one soup, yeah. Later I worked in a kitchen.
Q: Was your job considered a desirable job when you were working in the resort?
A: I was some vo – sewing only on the machine. You got [indecipherable] old lady, she showed us what to do and I was sewing on the machine. So I got only a – on – one – ons the sides from – from – from the corsets to do, so I was used to it and I was va – making very fast, yeah. But the aprons I was ma-managing, yeah.
Q: What can you tell me about th-the government inside the ghetto? How was the ghetto organized?
A: Rumkowski, some people talking about him very bad, but I can’t say anything about him because the people what they worked with him, they were the bad people because they were stealing away everything what he send in in ghetto for us, they stealed away more than half. And Rumkowski said with his word, I have gunovim(ph) what can I do?
Q: Can you –
A: But to me bar – Rumkowski was not a bad man, no.
Q: Can you translate gunovim(ph)?
A: Burglars.
Q: Burglars or thieves?
A: Yes, yes.
Q: How did the ghetto change over the time that you were there?
A: The ghetto didn’t changed much til we liquidate the ghetto. Got the hard life, a very hard life in ghetto, yeah. They took out Reverend [indecipherable] from another house, people to send away, til today they don’t know – we don’t know [indecipherable] got a brother between them. And we heard screaming in the middle of the night, they killed people, til – til the ghetto liquidate was the same thing.
Q: Let’s stay in the ghetto a little longer, I wanted to ask you, who else was in the ghetto with you? Was it just people from Lódz?
A: No, from Pabwianicz(ph), from Skarcz(ph), from around the little towns, they – they took away the parents and the childrens they send in. In the morning I went to – I vern – I went to work to the kitchen, a little boy was carrying a tallis – I don’t know how to say this in English, and he cried. The little boy maybe was 11, maybe 12 years. So I asked him what’s wrong. He said I am – I – my – they took away my father and my mother. I am alone and I don’t know where to go. So I took him into the kitchen. So the boss from the kitchen gave over to Rumkowski. So later the-they gave th-the childrens places – Rumkowski by himself was a leader from 200 childrens. And Janusz Korczak was a leader.
Q: When the Jews came from these other towns, from the smaller towns, how were they incorporated into the ghetto? How did they find housing and – and work?
A: To tell you, the vet – the first situation was [indecipherable]. We got a bed, we got [indecipherable]. They came with anything not. But Rumkowski later – they gave Rumkowski a pla – places where to open houses for they took out the Jews, th-they – th-the Jews to ghetto, so old – and th-the Gentile went in – in our houses [indecipherable]. So he opened a place and the people walked in, moved in, yes. But little by little they took out every day, every day, every day they loo – took out from ghetto people and they send away, so they got room enough.
Q: How did the people that were in the ghetto from the different areas, how did they get along?
A: I think we managed with each other normal. Not to fight, because we saw the end of us is not too good. So in ghetto was very terrible. The ghetto was not much better than Auschwitz.
Q: What contact did you have, you and the other Jews in the ghetto with the outside world?
A: Nothing, we ca – five o’clock we had to go home. Five o’clock – after five you couldn’t work. So we got only with the neighbors, but we got neighbors a few. We were sitting and talking and – an-and planning, an-and – and praying, and we believed we – we – we – th-that – th-th-that we will survive, yeah, but no – no – no – no organizations, no nothing, no.
Q: Did you have any idea how the war was going outside?
A: Outside not much, but one time came somebody, said the Russians are coming in, so we were happy. We were dancing, we were [indecipherable]. So we got punished a few days, we couldn’t walk out, not to work, nothing. They punished us because we were so happy the Russians are coming. And this was only a – a – a – a sa – a lie. The Russians start the war with the Germans, so we were saying to the ger – the Russians are coming to us.
Q: We’re going to pause and I’m going to flip the tape.
End of Tape One, Side A Beginning Tape One, Side B
Q: This is a continuation of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum volunteer collection interview with Chana Kalman. This is tape number one, side B. And I had asked you if you had any knowledge of what was happening outside of the ghetto, if you knew what –
A: No, no, no.
Q: What was life like inside the ghetto for the children?
A: For the children was very bad. They got a half a glass of milk, one egg a week. This was for the childrens. Later they took out – away the childrens from the parents, so I and my sister lived in a house what this was a old fashioned movie. So the whole machine with everything was on the roof. So I and my sister were sitting eight days and eight nights behind this little wall, covered with black material, a pail of water and a bread, and we were sitting and hiding the childrens and we got our childrens. But not long they liquidate the ghetto, so I had to bring my child on to Auschwitz with my sister together.
Q: Tell me about – you just said that they were going – they took the children from the parents.
A: Yes.
Q: Tell me about that event.
A: They – first of all they st – Rumkowski came out and he said we have to give the childrens. So, you know, not – not everybody was giving out the childrens, so they were sitting in the houses. So later the SS with the Jewish police came and they took out the childrens from the houses. This I was hiding on a roof, so they didn’t came on the roof.
Q: What did Rumkowski say to the people? A: I can tell you, he was not a bad man, but he got to listen to the SS because he was the alteste der Juden. The SS gots with him t-t-to deal, what to do, what di – so he had to listen to them, if not, they would kill him. So he came out, he said we have to give over the childrens.
Q: At that point, did – do the Jews in the ghetto know where the transports were going?
A: We didn’t believed, but we heard the rumors the childrens, they giving good, th-th – th-they giving to eat, and th-they – the childrens having foo – th-th – it was rumors. Th-The – the Germans da-da – la – get out th-the rumors. So we were thinking, after the war God will help us, we will have the childrens, we will have them. But when I came to Auschwitz, I saw none. Here is the end.
Q: Let’s stay in the ghetto just a little longer. When you – you just said a moment ago that there were rumors that the children would be okay, but you didn’t give your child, you hid. Why did you choose to hide?
A: I liked to go with my child together. I would give away my child, I would – I would lose my memory, I would be crazy. So I was sitting eight days and eight nights with my sister, with her little boy was younger, he was about three years, mines was five. So we were sitting and my little boy, I said, Yankovek(ph), I gonna give you a piece of bread. He said, no Mama, save this, because I’m afraid of the Germans. Save this, let’s – because he got afraid we gonna eat up the bread, so we have – we gonna go down. And he was afraid to go down. So we were laying on the – the – til everything was quiet. So I – they took away my cards, too. I didn’t got the cards because I didn’t got the – I didn’t give my little boy, so I didn’t got the cards. Later, after the eight days, was quiet. They didn’t took any more childrens, was no more childrens. I was afraid to go out with my chil – li-little boy, because everybody would say, take a look, they having the childrens. They took away our childrens. So we didn’t walk with our childrens outside too much.
Q: You said they took away your cards. What cards?
A: We got cards for our ba – for the ri – the racials, yeah. So I was punished so th-th-tha – from where I gonna eat, where did they took me away. But I told you, we got a bread, and the bread, I think we didn’t ate up a half from the bread. The childrens were afraid, the childrens were, Mama save, Mama save for later, save for tomorrow, save, save.
Q: After that, how did you get rations?
A: Later, they gave me back the cards and I took for the eight days, they gave me for the eight days everything, yes.
Q: Can you tell me about the shpare(ph)?
A: The szpera(ph). Szpera(ph) was the punishment that I told you. When we were dancing, oh, the Russians are coming, gi – da – we gonna get a little better. So they punished us, this much szpera(ph), we couldn’t get out, we had to stay in the house. You can’t – we co – we couldn’t go to cook, we couldn’t go – because we didn’t got nothing in the house, we have to go to the places where they got the gas, little gas stoves. So we were punished. This was szpera(ph).
Q: Was the ghetto different after the szpera(ph)?
A: No, th-the ghetto was the same way til they liquidate the ghetto.
Q: Was the ghetto different after they took away the children?
A: Was like – like a cemetery, a few days after they took away the childrens in the ghetto. When you walked in the street, you can see the air was crying with us. I can’t express myself in English. Th-The atmosphere was so s-s – was terrible. Was not – not comfortable to see mothers crying about childrens. I was happy with my child, but I paid with hell for other mothers what they cried what they took away the childrens.
Q: When did you, in the ghetto, realize where those transports were really going?
A: We didn't know where we are going, no.
Q: Was there any question as to where those trains really went, while you were still in the ghetto, when they were doing the deportations?
A: So one – we were va – we walked into my sisters-in-law, and she was in bed. In the meantime she died. We didn’t paid attention to her, we left her in the house and in the bed, dead. So she got twins, so they – we took them with us together. So a policeman came to our window and he said to us, how long you are able to fight, fight, don’t go. I said, where we are going? He said they’re going to give us other clothes, paper clothes. They gi – gonna take away from us everything, but we gonna go to work. But he knew we gonna get killed, not to – but he told us in a nice way, how long you are able to fight, don’t go by yourself. But we go – we got no bribe and we had to go to ourselves and we took a – that time they liquidate the ghetto from the last people. Now, this was in July, August. In August, yes. So we went to Auschwitz.
Q: Can you give me a time frame when you were in the ghetto, starting from when and ending August of what year?
A: From 1939 til 1945 – four, cause ’45 was after the war, yeah.
Q: During your time in the ghetto, did you have any idea about the Warsaw ghetto uprising?
A: Yes, because when they asked Rumkowski something about the giving – to give people to work or what, so we had the Warsaw alteste der Juden came to our alteste der to talk with him. But what they talked, what, I don’t know. But the Warsaw va – the Warsaw one, they came to the alteste der Juden to give the childrens, he took his five, he took his three, I don’t know how many childrens, he took, this I give in to you, the rest you take by yourself. So they killed them. This was from Warsaw. That’s what I know from Warsaw.
Q: While you were in the ghetto, did you witness any beatings, or executions or suicides in the ghetto?
A: Sure, sure.
Q: Can you tell me what – what you witnessed?
A: They were shooting and we heard screaming in the nighttime. So in the morning, all of th-th-the family, I don’t know, there’s a – maybe if they were friends together, they got killed. Wa-Was – was stabbed, an-an-an-an-an-an – and – and shot. We never were – we never were sure even in ghetto we gonna be saved, no.
Q: Is there anything else about the ghetto that you want to tell me, or that you want me to understand?
A: One thing what I saw, a older man with a beard went to pass the bridge. So the SS man called him and he called a woman, and she had t-to – she had to –
Q: To shave?
A: Shave th-th-the – the beard. That’s what I saw, yes. And the man was shivering like this. This I saw and I saw the lady was stupid, she took di-di – I saw a lot of things, but I – now I’m a little nervous, I can’t tell you ab – I saw a lot of things.
Q: How did you come to leave the ghetto?
A: We – we had the – th-they liquidate the ghetto, we had to go, everybody – th-the last – we – we went from the last people, yes.
Q: Tell me about your departure.
A: First of all, they put us in – in ta – in cattles trains with no windows – was a little, small window. And they put in so many we couldn’t breathe. One boy died from he couldn't breathe. I asked my little boy if he wants a li – a sandwich I got for him prepared. So he was feeling he is gonna die, he didn’t took the sandwich, he didn’t ate the sandwich. The sandwich was left on the train. They pu-pushed in in the train who knows how many ma-ma-may-maybe 200 people. We couldn’t breathe, we couldn’t sit, we couldn't – we – we were staying like – like pressed like to each other.
Q: How long did you travel on the train?
A: Oh, we traveled from – about 20 hours, because we left in the daytime and we came in the nighttime. In that time I didn't know the time in the nighttime when we came to Auschwitz.
Q: What did you take with you from the ghetto?
A: Three breads what I saved from my little boy. The best clothes what I got. I got jewelry from my mother and from my father, so I shared with my sister because we said maybe they’re gonna take me to another place, you to another place, so I got – I got a little bit my – from my mother, and my daughter – and my sister got [indecipherable] my little – my younger sister got from my father, do you remember the old-fashioned ag – watches with – with a chain? This she got, and she got papers. We got land, still the land is there. So we got the papers, so she got the papers from the land and she was throwing in Auschwitz, I throw it away in Auschwitz, too. I got my mother’s – a li – a watch with a chain, but the chain was a very thick gold chain. A bracelet, a beautiful, with her initials. My wi – my a – my ring, my mother’s rings. And I got some – yeah, my youngest sister wrote a letter to Pilsudski. Pilsudski answered my sister with his handwriting. This letter I throwed away in Auschwitz.
Q: Okay, explain pil – Pilsudski and this whole letter.
A: Pilsudski was the president, yeah. She wrote to him a letter.
Q: And what did she say in her letter?
A: What she said in the letter, this I zi – I can’t tell you, but what he answered in the letter, yes. He answered he enjoyed her reading. He is very proud of her ambition, what she got the ambition to rowt to hi -- to wrote – to wrote to him a letter, and he will see – to send somebody to give us work. But one time, one man came one time and no more, and they didn’t give us work, no.
Q: You mentioned that you had some of the things from your parents. What happened to your parents?
