United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Peter Black
September 21, 2000
RG-50.030*0409 PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a taped interview with Peter Black, conducted on September 21, 2000 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
PETER BLACK
October 27, 1995
Question: Good morning, Peter.
Answer: Good morning, Joan.
Q: Nice to have you here.
A: It’s great to be here.
Q: Peter, can you just tell me what your name was at birth, was it --
A: It was Peter -- Peter Black, has been all my life.
Q: And where were you born?
A: I was born in Boston, Massachusetts --
Q: Of course.
A: -- and grew up in the suburbs of Boston.
Q: And what -- what month and year were you born?
A: December 29th, 1950.
Q: And tell me just a little bit about your -- your family background, and your childhood, just a bit.
A: I grew up in a Boston Jewish family, non-Jewish, no temple, as my son will say now. And I stayed in Boston til I was 17 and went to the University of Wisconsin for undergraduate school, finished my graduate studies at Columbia University. I was certainly satisfied growing up in Boston, but anxious to get away, as any teenager might be.
Q: And were you always interested in history?
A: Yes. I did actually begin with a -- after the traditional dinosaub session as a young child.
Q: What’s dinosaub?
A: Dinosaub session. As in dinosaurs, those beasts that rock the --
Q: Aha, dinosaurs, I see, it’s your Boston accent.
A: Yeah, rock the earth --
Q: Right.
