United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Romana Koplewicz
October 8, 1993
RG-50.106*0120 PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of an audiotaped interview with Romana Koplewicz, conducted by Gail Schwartz on October 8, 1993 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's volunteer collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
ROMANA KOPLEWICZ
October 8, 1993 Beginning Tape One, Side A
Question: The following is an interview with Romana Margitte(ph) Koplewicz. The interview is being conducted at the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum on October 8, 1993, by Gail Schwartz. What is your full name?
Answer: Romana Koplewicz.
Q: And your maiden name?
A: Margitte(ph).
Q: And where were you born?
A: Warsaw, Poland.
Q: What was your date of birth?
A: April 26, 1919.
Q: Tell me something about your household growing up, who you lived with?
A: I was living with my parents and with my sister, which was six years older than me and played extremely important role in my life. It was rather a normal life. I attended private school all my life, and it was expected of me to do my homework and to be a good student. And it was a girls’ school. The name of the school was Frieda Mierlos(ph) in Warsaw, and I went there from kindergarten through 12 – no, the – I graduate gi – this was a gymnasium, which I graduate in 1936. I became – I got very good education in the school and after this I apply to law school, which wasn’t my first choice. Originally I wanted to be a pediatrician, but since being Jewish it was impossible to get to medical school in Warsaw. I even mentioned to my parents that I would like to go to France, but my parents were old fashioned and the idea of a girl going to France didn’t appeal to them. Could be if I would really fight, and wanted very much, I would go, but the upbringing was totally different than it is now of young people. And I was two years in law school, which I didn’t finish because it was in subject that it was ancient law and middle age law which appealed to me. And then for a – before the war started, I was helping my father in his factory, where I was typing a little bit, doing some bookkeeping, but nothing to get excited. And then the war started –
Q: Okay, let’s talk a little bit more about your home. Did you live in the town, within the town center?
A: In – in the city of Warsaw I was living, we had a very nice, comfortable apartment. I had the room which I share with my sister, which I adore. She paints my life with roses. She was the best person before I met my husband, in my entire life.
Q: And what was her name?
A: Edith. Edith, Esfia(ph).
Q: Did you live in a Jewish neighborhood, or –
A: It was a Jewish – not a goo – not a nice neighborhood. I would say too, except the janitor, hundred percent people were Jewish. Had three courts. The name of the street was Simonhof(ph) 13. It wasn’t a nice neighborhood.
Q: Why? In what sense?
A: Why? The streets were narrow, the people – the stores were ugly. Everything was – if anybody knows Warsaw, they know that it wasn’t a nice neighborhood. I was walking to school, we had always a housekeeper and we’re going for vacation, I went to camp. And I went even before the war to Latvia to see my father’s family, my grandmother, which I hardly knew, my aunts and uncles and cousins. And I had many, many friends and it was a nice, quiet life, I would say. I didn’t know any better.
Q: Were your friends Jewish children?
A: Majority of them were Jewish. As I say, except the janitor and the housekeeper, everybody was Jewish.
Q: And at school were your other classmates all Jewish also?
A: This was a Jewish private school. However, my first encounter was in law school, where, you know, it was a slogan, down with Jews. But the Jewish girls were the – we should be with the Jewish women but not with the Jewish men. And I witnessed when they were cutting with the blades, the coats from the Jewish students, it was winter. Do you know what I am talking about?
Q: Well, you want to tell us a little bit more about that? Who was doing it?
A: It was tremendous hatred toward Jewish students. I went to University of Joseph Pilsudski, which was – at this time he was dead, because he died when I graduate my gymnasium. And the hatred, there were many things which couldn’t – Jews couldn’t get. The majority of Jews who wanted to be physicians went to Italy, to France, to Czechoslovakia. And they tried everything, although some of them were very poor and it was very hard to support themselves overseas, but they were working as waiters and some help from the parents. However, since I was accepted to law school, and in the beginning I thought maybe I’ll be a law-lawyer, and – however when the instructor professor was coming to the class and you know, the Jews were sit – standing behind the benches and he said still, the Jewish student will not sit on the left hand side, I will not start the lecture. And he was leaving, and this was right away totally chaos in the class because the Christian were beating up immediately the Jewish male students. The women they didn’t touch. And many times when I was walking on the street in Warsaw, in so called mixed neighborhood [indecipherable] Christian, I saw men who were attacked by young Christian boys.
Q: Did you yourself experience, an – I mean, I know you observed anti-Semitic incidents, did you yourself –
A: I tell you, til the war –
Q: – experience any?
A: – I didn’t have any contact exactly, I didn’t have any Christian friends. I – so i-I – I was very limited because I was living in a ghetto, you know, yeah. I was going to shows, and we went to opera. I remember “Madame Butterfly” was a Japanese song – singstress – sa – woman who was singing. And however my direct contact, so different from my husband, who went to a state school, was totally different. Some of our teachers in my gymnasium were Christian, however, it was a different relation.
Q: How religious was your family? A: My mother was a believer, my father wasn’t. He – Friday within – my mother was lighting candles, but my father was never there because he was working Saturday. The business was open on Saturday and Sunday he was off. And my mother was kosher – the home was kosher, however, my father outside was eating not kosher. And I was not believing at all, and my mother was always very upset because she couldn’t understand why I cannot believe it. However, came a moment in her life when we’re thrown out – during the ghetto, from our apartment and we’re living not far from Umschlagplatz. You know what is Umschlagplatz? There were the trains were loading the Jews, and the Jews were going to the trains with the name of God [indecipherable] I heard this, I remember. And she said, children, don’t believe in God. And I will never forget this because it was coming from a woman who was so blindly believing in God that if the hole would open in front of me, and I will go in, it would be less than to hear from my mother that there was no God.
Q: Did you have any Jewish schooling?
A: No.
Q: Any training?
A: No. I don’t know how to – I understand Yiddish, and now when I am working with Russian refugees, they are very happy when they hear. My Yiddish is very poor, but I can manage very nicely. And they getting much better rapport than to – through translator, which I always have. And since I’m Polish, I understand Russian too.
Q: What language did you speak at home?
A: Polish. And I was angry at my par – at my mother that she didn’t speak, I was ashamed a little bit that she didn’t speak a perfect Polish. However, when we came to this country and it came to my daughter friend, she said, why your mommy is talking Spanish? In her eyes it was that I was talking Spanish.
Q: What were your parents’ names?
A: Maria and Samuel Ma-Magitte(ph)
Q: And what kind of work did your father do?
A: My father had a factory, dyeing factory, where he employed 50 people. It was in his building, he had few of the real estate. He was dyeing wool, silk, [indecipherable], rayon, felt, feathers, everything possible. And he had this – he came to Poland before the first war in 1914, I think, and he built up to – he was a very comfortable man.
Q: So you were considered middle class?
A: Yes, upper middle class.
Q: Upper middle class.
A: Yeah.
Q: Mm-hm. Why did you want to become a doctor?
A: I loved children and I wanted to be a pediatrician and I felt – although I think I was wrong because I’m very poor with science, I am rather for humanities. And it was glamorous and that’s what I ar – but i – I – most likely i-it – it was not a strong wish, because I could go abroad, my father could support me.
Q: All right, well let’s come up to the time now when conditions started to change and war broke out.
A: It started to change September first, immediately, the – our –
Q: T-Tell me what you were doing and what you remember from then.
A: September first – sept – August 31st or 30th, I came from my boyfr – in – not – not even a boyfriend, a friend who is now my husband.
Q: How did you meet him?
A: I met him in law school when he was – and through his brother-in-law, who was a lawyer for my father. So when my sister was going there which was helping my father in business, she said to his brother-in-law, I have a very good looking sister and how about if we’ll introduce? And when he saw me he decided that he fell in love with me, most likely, but he was fighting – he wasn’t ready to get married, my husband. My husband was thinking about having a child with a rather healthy Christian girl. Why Christian I don’t know, and to raise the child right.
Q: What year did you meet your husband?
A: 1935. ’ 36, excuse me.
Q: Okay.
A: And we were – you know, were –
Q: And you saw each other –
A: Yeah, but we never had a date. Then the war start – wi – I met him – I – I don’t remember if I knew that he is going. I went with my girlfriend to the country, to the mountains, it was August for a few weeks and he was there coming h – and I saw him, he was always wearing tiny shorts because he is a very good tennis player. So I always remember, and – and as a matter of fact, he made the ji – I had the cold and I was sharing the room with a girlfriend and he came in to find out about me, and he said make room. I was 20 years old and I got very insulted and I didn’t talk to him for a week. I was very naïve, stupid. And then I saw him occasionally, but whenever, as I said never had a date. He had some girlfriends and I have some boyfriends and the life went on, and in the ghetto when the ghetto was being closed – we were in the part which was ghetto, because it was a Jewish neighborhood.
Q: Okay, let – let’s an – before we get to the ghetto.
A: Yeah.
Q: Okay, it was August and you were in the country, and then –
A: And we came back the same day and I remember my mother was waiting on the balcony because she was very nervous what happened to me. And we came in September first –
Q: Correct.
A: – the Germans were throwing bomb on Warsaw.
Q: And where –
A: And the Polacks were robbing the stores and killing the Jews, before the Germans occupied Warsaw.
Q: And what happened? What other memories do you have of that day?
A: And it was a three court house. You know, in Europe mostly are courts. The first one, the second and the third. You know, in – it was – i-in New York you have very few houses where they have a court. Do you know what I’m talking? In the middle ha – you know, the – the part of the building in the middle, th-they threw the bomb and killed some tenants and [indecipherable]
Q: This was your building?
A: This was my building where I was living, but we’re living in the third one.
Q: Yeah.
A: And we’re always running to the basement, I remember, because they were bombing to Warsaw – seven days and – and they right away walked in. And the life changed completely. What I was doing, in the beginning were able to go to my father’ factory, which was still working, slowly. You know, it was outside of the ghetto, his factory. And –
Q: But the ghetto hadn’t been formed yet, not –
A: No, no.
Q: – for another year.
A: No, but you know, there were strictly Christian neighborhoods and Jewish neighborhoods.
Q: You were in the Jewish neighborhood.
A: Yes, I was living in the Jewish neighborhood. And then it came January 1940, my sister moved with her husband to us. She had the different apartment, but we decided to be together.
Q: From September to January, you were working at your father’s factory?
A: Yes, helping [indecipherable]
Q: Did you have enough food?
A: Yes, yes. We were comfortable, and we had jewelry which later on we’re selling to survive, so it wasn’t bad. I never suffered hunger. I – I didn’t have a place where to sleep later on when I was acting as a Christian, but I had money to buy food. And then in January, Gestapo came, three men from Gestapo and ask for Michael Minz(ph). And my sister grab him and run away through the kitchen entrance. That were to [indecipherable]
Q: This is her husband.
