United States Holocaust Memorial Museum Interview with Carola Steinhardt June 3, 1996
RG-50.030*0368
PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a videotaped interview with Carola Steinhardt, conducted by Joan Ringelheim on June 3, 1996 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview took place in Washington, DC and is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
CAROLA STEINHARDT June 3, 1996
01:01:08
Q: Good morning, Carola. A: Good morning.
Q: It's nice to be with you.
A: Same here, nice to meet you.
Q: Can you give me your name that you were born with and where you were born and when, please?
A: Right. I was born Carola Stern in 1925, March the 8th. No, March the 8th, right. In Nieder- ohmen, Germany. And my father's name was Meier Stern. My mother's name was Hedwig Stern, and we lived in Nieder-ohmen for many, many years before -- my parents were both born there. My grandparents were born there, and I believe my great grandparents were born there.
Q: You had a sister?
A: I do have a sister, yes. She was just about 15 months older than me, and we lived very happily in Nieder-ohmen.
Q: Tell me what you father did for a living.
A: My father was a cattle dealer and so had been my grandfather before him. And my father had sisters and brothers who more or less helped in this field. And then my grandfather was getting older, my father took over. So we had cattles, and we had everything. We had chickens and we had goats and we had a marvelous time, especially when we were young.
And we had eggs and we raised potatoes, and we had a whole farm. We were actually farmers.
01:03:01
Q: So including cattle and animals?
A: Including cattle, yes. We had a stall with cattles where my mother reluctantly went in the morning to milk the cows. It was a little shtetl, and we had people who helped. And we were farmers, just like anybody else in Nieder-ohmen. There was never any difference; we were Jewish, but we didn't feel it. We were Germans first. Jews were secondary -- nobody bothered with this religion. And since my father was a veteran of World War I, he was very well liked. Very well liked. And whenever someone had a problem in Nieder-ohmen, my father was sure to solve it. We called him later on the Kissingerof Nieder-ohmen.
Q: And do you remember any particular thing, problem that came up that he solved?
A: Well, there were problems with marriages. One wanted a divorce from one another, so they would come to my father and ask him could he talk to this one and that one. My father did, and he usually solved everything. He was very well liked. So was my mother.
Q: And tell me about your mother.
A: My mother was about 13 years younger as my father. So we looked upon my father as the head of the house, and my mother was one of us. She was a young girl. She always has been, and as we grew older, she sort of looked for guidance towards us, to my sister and me. And we became sort of like three sisters. She was quite young, she was still our mother. I mean I wouldn't say when it came to disciplining us, she was the head of the house. She knew just what to do, but basically we grew up together with our mother.
Q: If your mother was 13 years younger than your father, do you know approximately how old they were at this time?
A: My mother was 20. She was 19 when she got engaged, and my father must have been 32.
And my mother, and then she got married at 20 when my father was 33. And from the same village, it wasn't unusual.
Q: It wasn't?
A: No, it wasn't unusual. And they were very much in love, I was told. My father, everybody thought that, “Why would he marry such a young kid?” But my mother was in love with him, I heard that and I seen that.
Q: So this was a very warm household.
A: Very warm household, right. But we did -- our grandparents lived with us. And my father had a sister who was retarded. She lived with us, too. So it was a big house, but it was a happy house. My mother took care of the retarded sister, who, who,, really was never older than 11, let's say. You know, mentally. And we grew up with her, too.
01:06:01 And we had a dog, and, we were just one happy family. We never had any problems.
1 Henry Alfred Kissinger
Q: Did you milk the cows, too?
A: I tried. It didn't help me. But what I did, we had a dog. And whenever my mother punished me, I would go out. The dog was never in the house, that didn't happen in Germany. Dogs were kept outside, so, therefore, I went outside. If she punished me, I went outside and ate with the dog.
Q: And ate with dog?
A: I ate with the dog. And my mother would always catch me, and she would say, "Why are you eating the dog's food?" And I would just say, "Well, the dog didn't want it." And I ate it, and, you know, grew up healthy. Didn't bother me a bit.
Q: Was this dog a real pet for you?
A: It was -- he sort of was my friend, you know. He walked after me wherever I went. And, you know, in Germany where we lived, we had an outhouse. We didn't have a toilet inside, so the dog was right next to the outhouse. So every time we went there or stayed there a little while, the dog would scratch on the door. “It's enough already, come on out.” So the dog was part of our family, we loved him. And his name was Flock.
Q: Flock?
A: Uh-huh. Strange name.
Q: And what about friends? Were you . . .
A: Well, I had lots of German friends. I had little kids who played with me, and went to school with me and we were -- sometimes one of my friends would go with me to synagogue, and I went with her to church. My mother told me I shouldn't kneel down because that's not in my religion, so I didn't. Nobody bothered, I don't even think they did kneel down. Because I was always told, I remember that from way back. But, but I went to church Sundays and she went to synagogue on Saturdays. We were really close friends, and she's still alive. And she was happy that I did that for her, and I was happy to have her. I never wanted to let her go, why let her go on Saturdays and why would she let me go on Sundays, you know? But it changed, it changed in 1933. It changed a lot. This particular friend didn't change too much, but I had one girl which really was my idol. She was extremely intelligent, and she was a little redhead and she was very cute. And we played together, and at one point she said to me, "You know, Carola, I can't play with you anymore." And I said, "How come?" She said, "Because you're a Jew." I said, "What is that?" She said, "Well, have you heard of Hitler?" I said, "Yes, because every morning they used to say Heil Hitler. And,, but why can't you play with me anymore? Why?" She said, "Because my father told me that you're Jewish, and Gentile children, Aryan kids can no longer play with the Jewish kids."
01:09:08 And her father had gone to school with my mother, and they were the best of friends. And that was very, very hard for an eight-year-old, you know. It felt very strange that suddenly -- and then the whole group disappeared. Nobody would play with a Jewish child anymore. So then we sort of -- to the Jewish kids, we were friendly with the Jewish kids, too. So then we were all Jewish kids, and we stuck to one another.
Q: When that young friend said that to you, was that the first time that you felt . . .
A: Felt there was something -- I was different. And I couldn't, and I couldn't understand why I was different. Well, I was asked before by someone why was I different. Did I feel any different? You know, we did speak Hochdeutschwhich is the better German. So did that girl, this Lucy, Lucy, really, she spoke Hochdeutsch. Only the farmers had a dialect, and we never did have a dialect. So I felt was that the difference? No, it wasn't the difference, because the teacher spoke Hochdeutsch and so did the pastor of the village, speak Hochdeutsch. So we were -- I was very upset that suddenly they would make such a difference and make us feel like outcasts, and it got worse and worse. It was just -- that was only the beginning.
Q: Did it affect school right away?
A: Yes. Not right away, because we were pretty good students, especially my sister was an excellent student. So the teachers couldn't right away throw us out of school because we sort of held the school together. But there was a time where it was impossible, it was only Heil Hitler and there were these songs which I really can't translate. But in German it was “Wenn’s Judenblut vom Messer spritzt.” Jewish blood runs off the knives, then we feel better. Just songs like that, and we felt very, very, very bad. We were little kids and yet when we looked around and we seen the BDMthat's a circle of German girls who had these nice outings, we felt so why can't we be part of it? Why can't we? As a matter of fact, I remember at one point when I walked through the schoolyard -- we lived right next to the schoolyard -- everybody said, "Heil, Hitler" like this. I did, too. What did I know? I was eight years old. So my mother said to me, "You're not supposed to do that." I said, "Why not?" She said, "Haven't you been told that you are Jewish?" I said, "Oh, I forgot." So it was very hard to comprehend.
01:12:00 I couldn't get it together that I was suddenly Jewish and I couldn't do whatever I did before.
2 Standard German (German) 3 When the blood of the Jews sprays from the knife (German).
4 Bund Deutscher Mädel [League of German Girls] (German); branch of Hitler Youth.
But, they told me quickly that . . .
Q: That must have been very frightening.
A: It was very frightening, and, especially for an eight-year-old child. If you're older, you understand. But it got worse and worse, and by the age of 11, my parents decided that they couldn't leave me in school anymore. Neither myself nor my sister, and they would send me to a Jewish school. In the meantime they had made Jewish schools all over Germany where only Jewish kids went. And so, therefore, I went to Bad Nauheim, which was Bad Nauheim Bezirkschulein the district of the area where some of the children came by bus and some of them stayed in the dorm. And I was sent into the dorm. I was very homesick, and my mother and father had a hard time getting me there, but once I was there I was fine. And my sister went -- went,, she's a year older -- she skipping already, I don't know, in one grade here and there, went straight to a teacher's seminary to Würzburg. That was a teacher's seminary, so she went there and I went to Bad Nauheim.
Q: So what year, do you remember what year it was that you went? A: In 19 -- I was 11, 1936.
Q: Did you, before you left for school, did you talk with your sister about what was happening and what was happening to her?
A: Yeah, always, always. And my sister, although she's only 15 months older, she always was, like, she gave me strength. I, I made believe like she was 100 years older, and I would say to her, "So, what's going to happen to us?" She says, "Nothing. I don't know why you're worried. It's going to be all right. Don't worry about it. We'll live, we'll survive." So I figured if she said so, I'll probably survive and went on with that thought.
Q: Did your parents tell you this? I mean . . .
A: My father, my father was a very -- he was a German. He would say, "I went through World War I, and the Germans are really not bad people. And you're a young girl, and they're not going to kill you. Don't worry about it, you'll be fine. You'll absolutely fine. Hitler will disappear one of these days, and you're going to be okay. Just hold out, don't let them make you crazy. Be strong." And he had all these quotations from Schillerand Goetheand all kinds of things telling me that never do anything wrong. “Rather suffer, but don't do anything wrong.” Which in German is, “Lieber Unrecht Leiden als tun.” And he left me with all kinds of legacies, and I really, I, I lived through this on my life. I listened to ... he 5 District school (German) 6 (Johann Christoph) Friedrich von Schiller 7 Johann Wolfgang von Goethe 8 Better to suffer injustice than to cause it (German).
was a very bright man.
01:15:10 And,, at least of everybody feels their father's superior, but he had a strong mind. And he kept saying that definitely we'll get through that easily, and we don't have to go to America. We can stay in Germany, not to worry. So what was I supposed to do? I said “okay.” Little did he know what was in store for him.
Q: He and your family had an opportunity to go the United States?
A: Well, yes. We had a -- we could have gone, but the number was very high. It was 70 or something, 700, I don't remember anymore. And, we had an aunt, you know, my father had this retarded sister. And he wasn't going to let her go, just abandon her. So he said, "Maybe I ought to send the children," my sister and myself. But then he said, "But my kids want to be with me." And we really wanted to be with them, and he said, "It will be okay." But in the meantime, they took the retarded sister into a home to Berlin away from us. And my father was taken to a labor camp, and well, on the 10th of November, you know, he was taken to Buchenwald. And my mother came to, to Bad Nauheim where I was. And my sister came to Bad Nauheim from Würzburg and we reunited there. And from there we just faded out and being in Bad Nauheim with all the children and we were taken out of the school to the,. . .
Q: Could I interrupt for a moment . . . A: Sure.
Q: . . . and just go back a little bit? When you were at school and you were alone boarding was the first time you were away from home.
A: Right.
Q: Was that both difficult and easier because life was better for you there?
A: Life was better for me school-wise, yes. And I was 11 years old, so I figured eventually I would have to grow up -- be on my own, so I adjusted very well and I stayed there, and I had friends and it was fine. I could have gone home. I usually went home on vacations, but, it was never the same anymore because my sister wasn't there, and I stayed a few days and went back to school. But it was considerably pretty normal yet.
Q: So the Nazis or the Germans didn't come in and do things at the school? There was a . . . 01:18:05
A: Well, the 10th of November.
Q: In 1938?
A: 1938. The Germans came and threw all the kids out, cut into the feather beds, and the whole school was in an uproar. The little kids were crying, looking for their parents. But naturally there were no parents; it was a boarding school. And, well, I was one of the older ones, there were six-year-olds; we held on to them. And they marched us to the mayor's office with the teachers, and the teachers were frightened themselves. We thought we were going to be shot there, but we weren't. We stayed there for a while, and from there we went back home. We went home. In the school, and it was horror. All the feather beds and everything was on the floor and all the -- it was a religious school, so the torah cloths were all torn and the books all -- whatever. But we remained in the school until 1939. We fixed it up again, and we stayed there.
Q: And the kids fixed it up? Everybody . . .
A: The kids and the teachers and whoever helped, we all fixed it up, and we stayed another year until 1939.
Q: So when these Nazis left, did you -- were the kids still very frightened? Did kids have bad dreams?
A: Yes. The kids had bad dreams. So did the teachers. They weren't that much older, you know.
And we all had bad dreams. We were afraid. What would they do with us? And, -- but life went on, and we stayed till 1939 and then the school was eliminated.
Q: Now, your mother and your sister came there . . .
A: And my sister stayed in the school for another year. Since she had some education in Würzburg she taught first and second grade.
Q: In your school?
A: In my school.
Q: So this must have been very good for you?
A: That was good because I had my sister. My mother went back home, and I think she eliminated everything. She -- my grandparents and her and my father moved to Frankfurt because there was no way we could stay in Nieder-ohmen because we were recognized all over. In Frankfurt, nobody knew us as Jews. We were just people like anybody else until we had to wear the star. So we lived together with our grandparents and it was okay. And, my sister worked, she had to do some, also, some slave labor work in Frankfurt. I don't recall what she did, but I went to school yet because I was still young -- younger. I went to Philanthropin and I took a course in medicine.
01:21:00 I took a course in sewing, and I sort of was preparing myself for America. Learned how to speak English. And,, all kinds of courses, and that lasted until 1941. From 1931, till 1939 till 1941.
Q: Now, you father had been take to Buchenwald after Kristallnacht?
A: Yes, but he came out about four weeks later because he was the so-called Frontkämpfer because had for -- at the front, so that if you could provide papers, they let him out. So he came to Frankfurt, and in Frankfurt he was taken away to a labor camp. It was someplace around Mecklenburg, I believe; I don't recall. And he had to do really hard work.
Q: Do you remember his return from Buchenwald and what he talked about?
A: I remember. He was so thin, and he was -- a few teeth were missing. I don't know whether they had beat him up or something, and he never wanted to talk about it. He was afraid that we would be frightened by it. And since he was such a German, he thought that couldn't happen to him. He definitely didn't want to talk about it. And I remember in 1939 when German soldiers came back to Germany from Poland, and they used to say, "They're taking the Polish Jews and they shoot them right outside." And my father would say, “that guy never told the truth, it's not so. I'm sure it's not.” He denied it. He really denied it, he thought that couldn't happen. Germans were not bad people. It was, you know, they were educated mostly from birth. Beethoven, Schiller and all the whole thing, so he couldn't believe that.
Q: Were you more skeptical?
A: No. I listened to my father. I thought my father couldn't be wrong. Only I could be wrong. I was too young anyway to think -- my sister kept saying, "Daddy is right. Not to worry." So we weren't worried.
Q: So you're living with your grandparents . . . A: And my parents.
Q: . . . and your parents and your sister.
A: My mother and my sister. My father was then taken away.
9 Crystal Night (German); Night of Broken Glass.
10 Front line soldier (German) 11 Ludwig van Beethoven
Q: Taken away?
A: Right. In Frankfurt. And it was bearable. We had a room and we didn't have much to eat, but we had food stamps, and we got food here and there. My grandfather used to go and buy things, but we were always rationed. My grandmother was always afraid that I would eat too much. Because I was always tall and heavier than the rest of the family, and she couldn't stand that. Whenever I ate, she said, "It's enough."
01:24:00 That was a little hard for me, but she didn't mean any harm. I just took it very badly. But, in 1941 they took 150 or 60 young girls from Frankfurt to Berlin to a labor camp, and I was among them. My parents remained. My mother and my grandparents and my sister remained in Frankfurt, but I was taken to Berlin.
Q: Now, by then you were wearing a Jewish star?
A: By then we were wearing -- yes. By then we were wearing a Jewish star, right. Q: And these are just young Jewish girls that they're taking?
A: Young Jewish girls. Q: And . . .
A: Not older -- we were maybe ‘til 18. I was 15 then. Q: And how did you find out you had to go?
A: Well, we got a notice . . . Q: In the mail?
A: . . . we had to be -- in the mail. And we had to be there at a certain time, and a doctor would examine us, a Jewish doctor. And we were told we were going to a labor camp, which we did, and we were all taken to Berlin. Now, we were -- like I was 15 years old. I didn't think that was so terrible. I went with lots of friends. Of course, I had to say goodbye again to my parents from then I would never see them anymore, and my grandparents and I went to Berlin. And when, when, we came to Berlin, we were put up in an old movie house, and, it was in a very good neighborhood. But it was an old movie house and they made it in little rooms, so we were about -- two, four, six, eight people -- eight girls together. It was livable. If they would have left us alone, we could have survived there during the war. It was livable. So, of course, food was scarce, but at that time they had occupied Italy. They brought watermelons, and we had enough potatoes, so we made potatoes and we fried them with nothing. Made potato pancakes and watermelons and we got a little bread, and we got by. And we worked for the Siemens-Schuckert-Werke in Berlin. It was pretty hard labor, especially for a 15-year-old, but . . .
Q: What were you doing?
A: We were making airplane doors. Well, I wouldn't say doors. A little, it was more or less windows. We had to cut off pieces,, we put it on a -- in German, it's a trebank.I've seen these things here, and I kept looking at them. I said, "This is what I worked on." You had to put it into the machine, and then you had to put the knife really close to it.
01:27:01 And then it would cut off a piece, make it to a certain size. And very often if you didn't do that right and the thing kept falling out, you know, and would hit you. But I was always very careful to do it right, and I did okay. They paid us very little, but we had enough money to support ourselves.
Q: So they did pay you?
A: They would pay us a little bit, yes. But we weren't just Jewish girls, there were German people living in Berlin, older people who worked there. And I was in Abteilung505. That was really for big, fat people. And since I was strong and tall, they put me in there while the others went to different places, but luckily I survived in that place. It was, it was bad, but the voice of my father came up, "You've got to survive. You have to be strong." And I tried very hard really. It wasn't always pleasant, but Berlin was not the worst. The worst is yet to come.
Q: Let's stop and we can change the tape. 01:28:15 End of Tape #1
12 Lathe (German)
13 Division (German)
Tape #2
02:01:06
Q: Okay, Carola, I wanted to ask you a few questions about Frankfurt. Did your mother work during this time?
A: No, she didn't. She took care of her parents, our grandparents, and, she took care of us. Q: Where was the money coming from for food . . .
A: I don't know. I have no idea. Maybe they had a little bit, I have no idea. There was no one working, and I don't know where the money came -- maybe from my grandparents. I asked that question many a times.
Q: Do you know if your parents sold the farm, or was it confiscated?
A: Yeah, they just took it. It wasn't sold. It was confiscated, absolutely. So we didn't get any money from the farm then until later on. So there was -- I don't know. What I lived from, I have no idea.
Q: Do you remember when your dad went to the forced labor of the . . . A: I remember that, right. I remember that.
Q: What was that day like?
A: Well, we were afraid that we weren't going to see him anymore. And he said that he would come back, not to worry. He's not going to leave us, he will come back. But I didn't see him anymore. My mother and my sister did, but I didn't see him anymore.
Q: And how come they were able to see him?
A: They took Jewish people out to labor camps. They wouldn't let anybody in there, and I suppose he wrote to them here and there. But I was taken away, so I had no connections with my father anymore. I would write to my mother once in a while, and she would write back. But that was only a short while, I was taken in 1941 to Berlin, in February.
02:03:01 And my parents were taken then altogether to Lódz in September of 1941.
Q: Did you know they were taken in September?
A: Yes.
Q: How did you know that?
A: They sent a letter saying we are relocating to Litzmannstadt. I still didn't know what that meant. They were moved out of Frankfurt to Lódz together with my sister, that's all I knew. Nothing else.
Q: Now, the war started in 1939. A: Right.
Q: Was there a particular effect on you other than being Jewish?
A: No, there was no particular effect, not on us personally. We went about our way like I was in school yet and, but no, not me. I mean, I was absolutely away from everybody. You know, I was all on my own. Then in Berlin, of course, I was together with other girls, and we formed close ties; we really did. We had no other choice. All we had was each other, and we didn't know what was going to happen. Their parents were also taken, so, we didn't know. We had to really stick to one another and bond.
Q: Can you describe those relationships, what kinds of things you did together?
A: Well, we were -- the more religious girls would eat together, you know, and I was one of them. And a little bit, I think, I was an outcast because the others always thought I was a little bit too religious. I really wasn't, I was just observant. That was how I was brought up from home. But other kids really didn't care about religion, the other girls. They did whatever they had to do, so I made sure not to eat meat and things like that, you know. If there was meat available, I stayed away from it, I didn't -- I was very kosher.
Q: Now, this is interesting, because when you talked about your childhood and when your friends wouldn't talk to you anymore, you said, "But I didn't think I was Jewish."
A: Right. I didn't think I was, but kosher I was.
Q: I see, so it was different. You had a certain set of traditions that you followed that were habitual?
A: Absolutely. Right. It was very much accepted in Nieder-ohmen, very much so. Because on Passover, we would hand out matzos to our Gentile neighbors and friends, and they in return would give us eggs. And I very often went to my friend's house and they had these beautiful salamis hanging in their cellar. It looked so good to me, I asked my mother many a times, "Why can't I just have a sliver?" And she said, "It's not kosher. It comes from a pig." So that was it, it was a no-no and I lived by the rules.
02:06:01
Q: Now, when you're in this factory, was that harmful in any way? I mean, are you getting weaker because you're not eating some of the things that you weren't?
A: Well, we were young, 15 years old. No, I wasn't really that weak, but I missed my parents. I missed everything. But, you know, there was one thing we were young, and I think that really helped. Because when you're young, you always feel that something better is going to come, and it will eventually be good again. And we really didn't think of the worst, none of us did. We thought, “Eventually this will all end and we are going to go home again, and we'll be free.” But it didn't come to that, never did.
Q: Were you praying with these young girls, as well eating together?
A: I did. I prayed for myself. They didn't do much praying. But I had one girl -- two other girls who were equally religious, and we did a lot of praying. But the other girls really didn't.
They sort of looked down on us a little bit like the frumis -- frumiesyou know. That was done, but it didn't bother us a bit. It was okay.
Q: Now, did sometimes difficult things happen so you had to really help each other, not simply support each other spiritually?
A: Spiritually. In Berlin?
Q: Yes. Did someone get sick and they needed to . . .
A: Well, it wasn't that much that people got sick, but, you know, they were young girls and they wanted to have dates. They wanted to go out on a date, and maybe they did. And they wore the Juden-star, the star, and they were caught. And when they were caught, they went right to the gas chambers. They went right to Auschwitz where we never heard from them again. So that was a big issue, and so many girls disappeared. They just felt we'll take the star off and nobody will even know that I'm Jewish. After all, our skin was white. So nobody would know, but they were always caught, and many of the girls were taken before that time to camps and never survived.
Q: Now, who would they meet and where . . .
A: It's hard to say -- it's hard to say who they met. They were recognized by somebody. Maybe their nose was too long. Maybe they were stopped by a Gestapo, who would say “Du bist eine Jüdin?” and then what? To say “No.” “Where do you live?” You had to have papers, 14 Pious Jews (Yiddish) 15 You are a Jewess? (German)
that was it.
Q: No, I meant boys. Where were they meeting boys?
A: Oh, where did they find boys? Well, in the factory, you could find not just Jewish boys.
There were the men who helped us with the machinery. Every young men, young German men, who sort of became interested in the Jewish girls, and if you were stupid enough, you would go with them. But, otherwise, you just didn't do that.
02:09:02
Q: So you never thought about doing that?
A: Never. First of all, that wouldn't have been my thing. I was much too religious. Second of all, that was something you just didn't do as a decent human being; you just wouldn't do that. So
. . .
Q: Did you have some kind of a social life when you went to that, but when you were boarding in school?
A: In Bad Nauheim?
Q: Uh-huh.
A: Oh, yes. We had a wonderful life there. We had -- it was very good there. Really, it was easy. I met my husband there. He went to the same boarding school.
Q: So were you boyfriend and girlfriend in that school?
A: We were -- I had an eye on him. I don't know whether he had an eye on me. Like girls usually do, yes.
Q: So you had a crush?
A: I had a little bit of a crush on him. I had a little crush on the teacher, and like all girls do, that was okay. But, you know, I went away, and we had different, very different roads, you know.
Q: Now, there seemed to have been some freedom of movement being to work in that . . . A: In Berlin?
Q: . . . in Berlin.
A: Yes.
Q: And you saw your father's sister?
A: Right. I, we could go out on certain days. We had a curfew, of course, you know. But we could go out on Sundays if we weren't working in the factory. And I remember taking another girl along. I had heard that there was an institute for retarded people, and that she was brought there. So every Sunday I went with my friends to that place, and -- to meet her, to see her. And she was so happy when I came, and she didn't really know where she was. She had her friends there, and it was ring around the rosy and whatever, and she was happy to see me. And I was happy that she was happy, and I went back into the labor camp, until one day I went to see her -- wanted to see her and it was closed. Closed indefinitely, no more. Somehow they had taken them all some place and suppose gassed them.
Q: That must have been a horrible day.
A: It was terrible, right. But I realized -- I still didn't realize that they had gassed them. I thought maybe they put them someplace else. I mean, you really didn't -- maybe we were so naive we really didn't think of gas chambers because we thought relocating, relocation, that was the thing. Gas chambers were far from our minds. We didn't think that could happen. That was only later. So when she wasn't there anymore, I was devastated, but there was nothing I could do. That was it.
Q: So now you're really alone in a way that you've never been before. Now, your parents are Lódz and your sister is in Lódz?
02:12:03
A: Right. And my aunt, well she wasn't much of a help, but she was there, you know. While I was in Berlin, I knew she was there, and I could see her. She was someone from home, but that was it. There was no, no relationship with anybody. We sort of had each other, the girls.
Q: How did you deal with it? I mean, did you cry? Did you get really depressed?
A: Well, we all did, you know. When we cried, we cried together. And like, you know, like in German they'll say, “geteilter schmerz ist halber schmerz,” “If you share your pain with someone, it's half the pain.” And we shared everything, everything, even the clothes we shared. We were really one happy bunch together. We made the best of it, but it wasn't until we were in Berlin until 1943 in February, they took big transports, more than a thousand Jews from Berlin, including us. And they told us in the labor camp that they didn't need us any longer. We are going to be resettled to Poland, and they're going to have Russians -- White Russian, who were replacing us. But what could we do? We were going together on 16 Shared pain is half the pain (German) the transport, and we were together again, all of us, 160, 50, 40, whatever we were by then. Some of the girls, I must say, had gone back home to their parents and were taken with their parents to a camp. How this was arranged, I don't know. But, I couldn't, my parents just disappeared overnight, so I couldn't have gone with them.
Q: What rumors are you now hearing? I mean, you're in the factory for two years in Berlin where some information must be coming in to somebody. Are there rumors that you're hearing about ghettos, about killings?
A: Yeah, we heard about ghettos. Never about killings. We heard about resettlements in ghettos.
Killings, we didn't hear about. We, we kept thinking about the girls who disappeared from nowhere. That they did something wrong, they shouldn't have done it. But, we never thought that they were actually killed. We thought maybe they had taken them into a camp someplace else, but that they were killed? Never entered my mind, anyway. So it was not until 1943 in February we were taken to -- we didn't know where we were taken.
02:15:04 We were taken to Auschwitz. We were going on the cattle -- on the train. And in the train, it was horrible conditions. We were in there for quite a few days, and, people died right then and there. And we had one pail in the middle there -- well, it was horrible. So ...
Q: Is that your worst time?
A: one of -- not knowing where we were going, not knowing what they were going to do with us, that was really hard. But there were always a few people, older people than us, who said, "It's going to be all right. You're going to be resettled and not to worry." We never really screamed, cried, or did anything. We just took it as it came, I guess because we were young. And we said, “It's going to be all right.” One sort of did that to the other, you know, we tried to really calm each other down until we got the train rolled in Auschwitz in February. And then we what happened, we got out in the middle of night and there was MengeleOf course, we didn't know who Mengele was, and there were quite a lot of other Gestapo and SS men and everybody around us with dogs. And they kept screaming in German, of course, "Aussteigen, Aussteigen! "And they formed a line, and “You go right and the other one goes left.” And whatever the older people left, the children to the left, and the younger people to the right. And we still didn't know what was going on.
Q: How big a transport was this, do you know? A: A thousand.
17 Dr. Josef Mengele 18 Get out! (German)
Q: A thousand?
A: Right. From Berlin.
Q: And how did you know it was Mengele?
A: I didn't know it then. Later on I recognized him. I really didn't know then. And he started screaming, "You get here. You go here." Well, by then I was 17, so I went into the camps and all the rest of the people -- I mean, the older people, and the people -- the children went to the gas chambers. But we didn't know that. So when we got to the camps, we were first -- they undressed us. We were sent to the sauna, and in the sauna -- they cut our hair before that. They cut our hair, and then we were tattooed. And we met in the sauna, we were all sitting together, not knowing each other because we had no hair and it was really -- for a young girl to suddenly have no hair whatsoever -- was a devastating experience. But it wasn't the worst. So we just looked at each other and most of the time, we didn't even recognize each other because we looked so different.
02:18:04 So after the so-called delousing, we were given clothing. Our clothes we never seen any more. So they gave us some old things. I was a tall girl and I had a blouse which went to here. No hair, and unbelievably you looked like a degenerate. You looked like an idiot coming out of there. And what happened to those beautiful girls, I've been asked many a times, but you were a young girl. You must have been a pretty girl. If that's done to you, you're not pretty anymore. You look disgusting, and, of course, that wasn't the worst yet. The worst was yet to come.
Q: How did they cut your hair, with what? Did they cut it with a scissors or with a razor? A: Clippers.
Q: With clippers?
A: Clippers and all the way down, so . . . Q: Did they cut your bodily hair as well? A: Yes, they did.
Q: Women cut your -- was it the same person who cut the hair on your head, or did you go in a line?
A: We went in a line, some of them did their head and some of them did the other, you know, bodily hairs for us. It was a line, it was very well organized like everything in Germany was very well organized. But the people who did that were other inmates, you know, that were assigned to that particular thing. And most of them didn't speak German at all, so the only language I spoke was German. So all, some of them spoke Polish; some of them spoke whatever . . . Czechoslovakian
Q: Did you -- you, obviously, then didn't speak with these women, or did you try to speak with them and say, "What's going on here?"
A: Well, you know, you know my friend, Zippyshe was around that area. She was in the Politische Abteilungand I remember her coming by and saying -- she spoke German, and she said, "Don't say a word. Just do what they tell you and you'll be okay." And I figured she really meant well with me, and I did what she said. I didn't say one word, and I told my friends, "Just let's keep still and do what they tell us to do." And they really didn't do us any harm except for someone who made a big to-do about it. I don't want my hair cut. Why should you? Some of the women were married to Gentiles, and they said, "My husband is an Aryan. Why should you cut my hair?" And that would get those girls who had been there for several years already extremely angry. They kept saying, "But you are a Jew. So, therefore, we have to cut your hair and shut up." So there was always some sort of an argument with cutting of the hair.
Q: Did Zippy go to a number of young girls and say, "Just be quiet"?
A: Yes, she would just go around and say, "Be quiet. Don't say anything. 02:21:00 Let them cut your hair. It's not the world's worst. It will grow back." And she was right, you know. This is not the world's worst, this wasn't.
Q: What was the tattooing like?
A: The tattooing was done --, well, like any tattooing here. People are tattooed all the time. The tattooing was they took your skin and they took a pin, a pen, pen and they sort of stuck it in piece by piece and they put the number. It's a real German number I have on my arm. And then this half a Winkel,here underneath, which I never knew what it actually meant. I thought maybe this was part of a -- half of a Magen David. That's what I explained to myself; I don't think that it was now. Whatever it was, I have it.
Q: Did that hurt?
19 Zippy Tichauer 20 Political division (German)
21 Corner (German)
A: Not really. Didn't hurt, no.
Q: Now, were you then given a number to put on your uniform?
A: Yes. Over here and we had like a cross in the back so we shouldn't be able to escape, so . . . Q: And who put -- who did that?
A: It was old people, other inmates who were assigned to do these things. It wasn't the SS women themselves. They just stood there and supervised. They didn't do that themselves. They stood and laughed and had a good time in seeing these poor Jews looking like animals.
Q: Were there any men around?
A: Yeah, once in a while there was a . . .
Q: I mean, when you were being registered, in that registering process?
A: There was always a few SS men standing there with the SS women, and -- but it didn't bother us. We really you know, we didn't look like women anymore anyway. We were not ashamed of anything, that's what we looked like and that's what we had to deal with.
Q: Were you registered the first day you came in?
A: I believe I was registered the first day I came in, because, you know, the Germans are accurate with their registrations and their book work. So I believe I was registered, maybe I wasn't. I don't know.
Q: Did somebody fill out a card of information? Just your number?
A: I believe so. Maybe they did. If they did, I don't remember. It could have been because why would they have the officers where Zippy worked, they called it the PolitischeOffice. So maybe they did, I do not recall it at all. It's possible.
Q: So you get these strange-looking clothes, you're shaved, and you have a tattoo? A: Right.
Q: Now, what happens?
A: Now, we were assigned to a block. I think it was Block 13 I was in. We were all the girls, not all of the girls who came at the same transport. So we were more or less together, and we
22 Political (German) were put on -- so we had what we call a Koje. 02:24:06 You know what a Koje is? A Koje is like a board. There was one on the bottom; there was one on the top, and I think there was a third one. We had no straw, we had no blankets, we had nothing and it was February. They took away our clothes, but I do remember they left me with my shoes. And I was a kid, I didn't know -- I had shoes, very simple shoes on. I was in Auschwitz three days and the soles had separated from the top. So I found a rag someplace and tied them together. It was quite a few weeks I walked barefoot in February. It was very cold. There was snow on the ground. I put all kinds of -- whatever I could find on my feet just to stay warm. And so they did put us into the barracks. And then every morning we had zählappellwhich is the roll call, and there was usually SS men or SS women that came. We stood there sometimes for hours in the freezing cold, so some of the girls already died right then and there because it was impossible. Couldn't take that. Food, we hardly got. And really, I mean, they were falling down left and right. So standing there -- then, one of the SS men would come and make a selection, and most of the time that was Mengele. And he would go to say -- he didn't like the face, he didn't like what you looked like, and he says, "Come on out. Come on out. Come on out." So I remember that so well. You know, I was brought up very religious, and the prayer you say when you die is “Shema Israel,” so every time he came around, I would just stand there and say my prayer. And luckily I was never taken. And I used to tell my friends, "Do what I'm doing." I was such a religious person.
Well, it worked for me, it didn't work for everybody.
02:27:01 So it went on for weeks and weeks. We marched out in the morning. We went to build barracks out in Auschwitz, and then the SS men came with their dogs. And if they didn't like you -- but who you -- liked you? You looked like an animal. They would just say, "Go, run after her. Go ahead and take the dog." The dog would bite you. I have a few bites on my legs. And, you know, by then you were already every day you looked skinnier and skinnier. There was nothing left of you anymore, and then suddenly I noticed I was getting typhoid. I started to -- couldn't control my bowel movements anymore, and I felt this is it. I'll probably lay down like the rest of them. By then most of the girls had already -- the first four weeks were the worst, and I probably won't be able to make this. But then I remember my father said not to give in. “You've got to be strong.” And at night I used to hallucinate and, you know, there was no Schindlerno Schindler's list or anything. If anyone would help you, it was the girl who laid next to you. She would say, "Here, look, I give you a piece of rag to clean yourself off, and I'll take your bread." Well, I much rather gave her the bread, clean
23 Bunk (German) 24 Roll call count (German) 25 Hear, O Israel (Hebrew); declaration of God’s unity and watchword of Jewish faith.
26 Oskar Schindler myself off, and be okay the next day. But it was horrible, I screamed for my mother, my father. There was nobody. I was a young girl, I just felt somebody should listen to me. I really would say the first four weeks, if you held out the first four or six weeks, you were okay. I think I did, I held out those weeks.
Q: Okay, let's take a break. 02:29:00 End of Tape #2
Tape #3
03:01:06
Q: Carola, you said that you were building barracks. So you were living in Auschwitz barrack now at the time?
A: Birkenau.
Q: And where were you building these barracks?
A: We walked out -- I don't know. We walked out, we walked in at night. Quite a distance, it must have been in Oswiecim, in someplace there. And, we, you know, we carried the stones. If we had sort of a jacket, we had to turn it around and we put the stones in there and carried them. The buttons in the back, and that's the kind of work we did.
Q: Were you put to that work very quickly within the first week of your coming?
