Interview with Ellen Marchese
July 15, 1995 Beginning Tape One, Side A
Question: This is side one of an interview with Ellen Bonnie Marchese. This is July 15th, 1995. We’re in West Park, New York and my name is Nina Ellis. Tell me if you would, when and where were you born?
Answer: I was born in Brooklyn, 1917, on Thanksgiving day.
Q: Where did you grow up?
A: I grew up partly in Brooklyn. No, I guess I didn’t grow up in Brooklyn. God, you’re going back 70 some odd years and -- what else.
Q: Tell me a little bit about your family life.
A: My father and my mother had an arranged marriage. She was years younger than he was. He was -- they came from Italy as immigrants. I don’t know whether she loved him, but they accommodated to each other. He died when he was fairly young and I was 13. She had six children and she was a lovely, brave woman. She raised us all with a great deal of love.
Q: When did you graduate from high school?
A: 1933.
Q: And did you go --
A: 1934, a-and I went into training in 1935, I was too young to go in when I graduated. And that was three years, King’s County, it was very famous in Brooklyn, at the time. It was a very tough training, we had affiliations at Bellevue Hospital, at Willard Parker. It was tough. I really chose training because it was during the depression. My family wanted to do something so that I’d get some education and they could afford the 300 dollars. And that’s why I ch -- I would never have chosen nursing, never.
Q: No?
A: No.
Q: But it was --
A: But it was a profession and it was available to us and that’s what I did, went into nursing.
Q: Mm-hm. And when you graduated, what did you do?
A: When I graduated I did psychiatry at Bellevue. From Bellevue -- at the start of the war I went into -- USPHS wanted nurses for their maritime and Coast Guard station down in Manhattan Beach in Brooklyn.
Q: Public Health Service?
A: Public Health. I worked there for awhile. Then I was a bad girl, I started a petition so that married nurses could get Sundays off. And they didn’t like that, they sent me across the street to the dental clinic, where I had a ball, since I was the only woman there. Then, from there I went to 42 Broadway, Spar sick bay. I was in charge of the sick bay.
Q: What is Spar? A: Spar was the Coast Guard. Oh no, wait a minute, before that I went to the -- oh, the USPHS, I told you that, that was US Coast Guard and Merchant Mariners. Then the Spar sick bay and then I decided to join the army and see the world. Went to basic training in Atlantic City, where we went on a 50 mile hike with brand new field bo -- 25 miles -- field boots. Everybody got blisters. They told us to walk in the ocean and that would soften the leather. And they took girls home in ambulances by the droves. But I made it. I made it. From there we went --
Q: They took them home in ambulances from that hike, or --
A: From the hike. It was gruesome. It was really gruesome because we had the new shoes on. Everybody got blisters. So -- but we did everything else, I -- I -- basic training was okay. We were young, we were fit and we got through even climbing up the sides of the ship, where a few of us froze on the ladder.
Q: Oh, those rope ladders? Those big cargo ropes?
A: It was fun. Yeah, I liked that. I was athletic, I liked that. What else? Then I went to -- where the hell did I go then?
Q: When did you go into the service?
A: ‘44
Q: Remember what time of year?
A: I think that it was before Christmas, because we had a miserable Christmas in England, miserable.
Q: So --
A: We went to s -- o-on the Queen --
Q: Elizabeth.
A: Elizabeth. Zigzagged all the way across.
Q: Do you remember very much of the crossing?
A: Yeah, I did. Played a lot of poker, had a wonderful time, lot of men around.
Q: They let you mingle with the men?
A: No, it was the officer’s mess, whatever -- the lounge. Not with the enlisted men, just the officers. And there was a lot of poker playing, cause there wasn’t much else to do and I’m sure there was drinking, I can’t really remember. But the crossing was -- many of the kids in my group got really seasick, because it was rough. So a lot of them spent time in their bunks, feeling green. And we landed in Scotland and then they took us to England and I remember bunches of prostitutes walking down the streets and yelling at us.
Q: Where was this?
A: And we lan -- in England. I can’t remember where in England.
Q: What were the prostitutes --
A: But we landed in the middle of the night and they weren’t ready for us. Oh, yelling, “Hi, yank,” and all that stuff. The men were with us, too, you know, the enlisted men. We’re marching down the street in the middle of the night til they found us billets and that was the coldest I’ve ever been in my life. Some of the girls got st-straw from the first floor. Me and my two roommates -- my two roommates and I wound up at the attic, with fireplaces that didn’t work. And nobody slept, we were so cold. We slept on the floor in our bedrolls. So cold, bitter. Then we walked miles to the mess to eat. I got lost one night in the fog. The fogs were awesome, they were really pea soup. England was nice. We also went on detach service, which means that they weren’t ready for us to -- we were an evacuation unit and they didn’t have anything for us to do in England til we crossed. And we went to a hospital in the south of England and took care of our boys. And that was nice, because that was the first actual nursing that we did. And it was interesting, we been doing what we were there to do and we liked that. We were sent to different hospitals in England. And when we came back, we crossed the channel. I remember meeting Garson Canaan crossing that channel and going up to him and saying my sister was an actress. Well, his wife was Ruth Gordon and he said, “My wife is a famous actress.” What else? We landed in France. From then on trucks -- hurry and wait, lines -- hurry and wait.
Q: And then you -- they set up the hospital in France?
A: In -- in France, they set up our tents in Sudan I think it was. Bavaria, somewhere in Bavaria. We lived in tents and that was fun. I lost a very expensive lighter in the grass. We slept on our bedrolls, on army cots and you could feel any -- every lump of the mess kits.
Q: Under the cot? You kept your mess kits under your cots?
A: No, we kept the bedroll on top of the cot so that the cold would not come up under. It was sort of an insulation. And it was kind of, you know, uncomfortable, but at least it was warmer than just sleeping on a cot.
Q: Yeah. And what was your particular job in the hospital?
A: I was the psychiatric nurse.
Q: Oh.
A: I don’t remember if I told you that I -- from King’s County, where I was a pediatric nurse, my -- my love was psychiatry. So I worked in Bellevue for a few years, til somebody hit one of the nurses on the head with a faucet, and scooted. New York’s bad boys. And the nurse that was on duty that night, happened to be a big, hefty girl and she was working for me and I said, “Enough of this, I quit.” I did. But psychiatry, I guess I had m -- that’s why the army chose me for that facet, that was my area of expertise.
Q: I’ve read that for the GI’s who were at the Battle of the Bulge, that there was a lot of psychiatric trauma there.
A: Yes, yes. I didn’t experience that because we were there after the Bulge.
Q: Oh.
A: Yeah. But they were just children -- they were just children. How can you cope with death and dying and your buddy being blown up? You can’t. You --
Q: How did you help them?
A: Actually, we didn’t -- we didn’t get to do that much nursing til we -- we were set up in the tents and mostly the surgical girls did the wounded. There was one tent of the neuro-psychiatric. And I was on night duty, so they were mostly asleep. They had medication. The corpsmen did all of the -- the physical stuff. So there was just tender loving care, that’s all you could do.
Q: What -- what was the common symptoms of what they were [indecipherable]
A: I guess you’d call it -- let’s see, battle shock -- what would you call it?
Q: PTSD?
A: Yeah.
Q: Post -- Post Traumatic Stress?
A: Yeah, but that wasn’t known then. They didn’t call it then. And -- now in World War One it was called shell shock. And people came out of that with tics and tremors and all the rest of it. But these boys were mostly in shock -- in shock. And we didn’t get -- since we were an evac -- we were moving all the time, we didn’t really get to follow up anybody that we took care of. The only time we were able to do that was in England, because we were there for quite awhile.
Q: But what could you do for them if they were brought there? What -- what was the standard kind of --
A: Well, it wasn’t -- they didn’t have the sort of tools at hand as you would have in a psychiatric hospital. That’s right, I did the basic training. I also worked in a psychiatric hospital where they had German prisoners. But most of the tools in psychiatry then, were either medication -- and it wasn’t as kind as tranquilizers or what -- anything they have today. They used -- for violent people they used hot tubs -- this was at Bellevue -- where the patient was immersed in a tub of warm water with a canvas sheet covering it. And that was supposed to be soothing. But it wasn’t. It wasn’t soothing at all. Either that or a cold pack. They would wrap them in cold sheets and do that for hours. But -- it was very interesting. I mean, the things that people say -- I used to keep a journal of everything -- the things said. Now, one young man committed suicide by burning up everything he had ever written. He was a writer and that was his way of committing suicide. So he was in there. The kids I took care of at Bellevue were adolescents in trouble who were sent there by the court for 30 days to be evaluated -- to see if they were going to go to a reform school or being sent home or being sent to another mental institution. They were just there temporarily. And --
Q: And what about the ones in the field, though?
A: The ones in the field, I don’t know what happened to them, because eventually they were either sent home with a section eight. I don’t think that too many of them recovered, I really don’t.
Q: But you didn’t have those hot baths there?
A: No, no, no, no. They had no facilities, no --
Q: Just medication?
A: Just medication. And a psychiatrist I guess would talk to them, Daniel Freedman.
Q: That was the name of the psychiatrist?
A: Yeah. But I didn’t know him til -- when? It all merges in -- it all flows in together so that there’s no sequence to it.
Q: Was it -- were there a lot of these men?
A: A whole tent full.
Q: At any give time?
A: Well, that time in Germany, you know, that was the height. It was right after the Bulge, so that was the height of dreadful experiences.
Q: And how many would be a tent full?
A: I’d say 10 on each side. 10 cots on each side. I don’t know if all of them were occupied, though, I can’t really remember that, I just remember I was on night duty and they were not -- they didn’t have demands, as somebody physically wounded would have. They didn’t have demands. They were in their own world. It was really sad, because physical trauma, at least you can mend at times -- not always, but mental trauma is kind of more difficult. Really, your very psyche.
Q: Yeah.
A: And that’s about all I can remember of that. Now, when we were at Gusen, they didn’t have a psychiatric ward, they didn’t have that. There were all these little huts, with tiers of cots and all these living skeletons.
Q: Let me ask you, before that, about how did you go -- get to Gusen and what were the situa -- what was the situation?
A: Got orders to go and the colonel spoke to us and when we got -- we didn’t know where we were going, except we were following our medi -- our medics from Germany, we went into Austria and when we got there -- beautiful little village, little Alpine village like this. And the hills, the Alps were simply breathtaking. I understand the danu is always filled with -- Danube was always filled with bodies. And the colonel got us in a group and he told us that none of us were going to be forced to go and work in this camp. That if we wanted to opt out, we could. But of course, nobody did. We all were gung-ho to go and help. So we all went to work and -- horror --
Q: What -- do you remember the first time you went into the camp?
A: Well, you sort of remember, yeah, all those people lying on those bunks. They were like living dead. Nothing but eyes and bones.
Q: And what did you do?
A: I really can’t remember it. I -- I -- I do try to block it out. I don’t want to remember. Don’t want to. Cause somebody did that to them. A human being responsible for that.
Q: Mm-hm. When -- did you -- were you told who those people were? Did you know who they were?
A: They were all -- there were Poles, there were Gypsies, there were political prisoners, all sorts of people there that -- you know, undesirable. Jews, everybody mixed in. I know that Mauthausen got -- was much more crowded and was supposed to have been much worse than Gusen. But Gusen was bad enough. It was -- you know, the same thing on a smaller scale.
Q: Gusen was a sub-camp of Mauthausen --
A: Right, right.
Q: They were close by each other.
A: Right, right.
Q: Did you go to Mauthausen at all?
A: No, I didn’t want to go. No, didn’t want to go. And then I was traipsing around with my future husband.
Q: Oh.
A: I didn’t even go to Hitler’s bunker, when the whole group went, because I had a date with Mike.
Q: You met there?
A: Yup.
Q: At Gusen?
A: Yup.
Q: Huh. Was he part of the corps?
