United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Paul Jonas
May 3, 2013
RG-50.030*0695
PREFACE The following interview is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
PAUL JONASPRIVATE
May 3, 2013
Question: This is a United States Holocaust Memorial Museum interview with Mr. Paul Jonas, on May 3rd, 2013, in Brooklyn, New York. Thank you Mr. Jonas for agreeing to speak with us today, and I’d like to start the interview at the beginning. Please tell me your name at birth, where you were born and when you were born.
Answer: I was – my name is Paul Jonas, born in southern Poland. I’m born 6-22-22.
Q: So, June 22nd, 1922.
A: Yes.
Q: Okay. What kind – you wish to say something?
A: Yeah – no, no.
Q: Okay. I’d like to know a little bit about your family. Can you tell me, did you have brothers and sisters?
A: Yes, we were seven kids; four brothers, three sisters. My father was – had a bank, he was pretty [indecipherable] and my mother was the cook.
Q: So your father had a ba – was a banker?
A: A banker, yeah, a banker, yeah.
Q: Okay. Tell me a little bit about your siblings. And I’ll want to talk about your parents too, but with seven children, that’s quite a family.
A: Yes.
Q: Could you tell me their names, from the oldest to the youngest?
A: Yeah, the oldest was Abraham, then came Joe –
Q: Okay.
A: – then Esther, then Schuler(ph).
Q: Okay.
A: Then – ri – hi – Hinder – Hil-Hilda.
Q: Hilda.
A: Schuler(ph), me and Manya(ph). Manya(ph), you met Manya(ph).
Q: Manya’s(ph) the youngest.
A: Yeah.
Q: Okay. And – and of the brothers and sisters, was there somebody who you were the closest too?
A: I usually with – with Manya(ph).
Q: You – the two youngest were together.
A: Yeah, ye-yeah.
Q: Okay. Did you hang out with your older brothers at all?
A: Yes, sure.
Q: What were they like? I mean, did they have different personalities?
A: Joe [indecipherable] he was a little bit different. He used to take the toys what we got, and try to see how they are made, and never put it together.
Q: So he liked to take them apart.
A: Yeah.
Q: Yeah.
A: Yeah. Otherwise he was good. Sometimes we were fighting. I had th – a little knife, maybe a inch. I tried to kill him. So my mother used to say, okay, okay, I’ll kill – I’ll help you kill him, tomorrow, tomorrow. Ten minutes later we were playing again, you know.
Q: Abraham, the oldest, what was his personality like?
A: He was a very nice, all business re-really. He never had time to go to play, he was busy, he was working in the bank.
Q: He was working in the bank.
A: In the bank, yeah.
Q: And was he a serious kind of person – ser – a more serious kid?
A: Yes, ye-yes. He was the oldest, he was [indecipherable] the father.
Q: Okay.
A: And he is the one who got killed for the – from the Nazis, a day before the American army came in.
Q: We’ll talk about that. We’ll talk about that later.
A: Yeah –
Q: Right now I’d like – what I’m trying to do is get a sense of what was the world you were born into. Who were the people who were important to you who were in it. What was life like. You know, all of that ca – I’m trying to paint that picture with words, your words.
A: Yeah. Well, we were very good all, but in general was very poor. The whole country was poor, especially our town were very poor. There were a couple – two factories, I think, or three. And –
Q: What did they make, those factories?
A: One was sneakers, or soles from the sneakers, one locomotives.
Q: And one made locomotives?
A: Yeah.
Q: Okay.
A: And we have some what a – what a – what do you call it, cutting in the – the trees? Th-The lumber yards.
Q: A lumberyard.
A: Or a lumber – a lumber mill, a lumber mill. And this is the way the people – and we had the river San, so most of the – of the – went fishing and selling the fish.
Q: Tell me, where in Poland was the town of Sanok? Where was it located?
A: This was – it became the border between the – during the – 1939, between Germany and Russia.
Q: I see. So it’s –
A: It was li – years ago, Galicia, Ukrainian over there. And over – on the river, that was th-the border, where the people used to [indecipherable] run away, and –
Q: So there were – so when one side of the San River was Poland?
A: Yeah.
Q: And the other side was already Soviet Union?
A: Soviet – yeah, yeah.
Q: I see.
A: I mean, became.
Q: Became that way.
A: It was Ukrainian, yeah, before, ukra – and then became the Soviet Union, yeah.
Q: Were there many Ukrainians in – in Sanok?
A: Yes, yes, yes. I would say 90 something percent.
Q: 90 percent of Sanok, it was Ukrainian?
A: Yeah, I mean, the whole side was Ukrainian, yeah.
Q: I see. So how many Poles were there, not many? A: Well, as – were hard to tell how many because everybody spoke the same language.
Q: I see.
A: They went only the same church, so – but we were studying in school, Ukrainian.
Q: You were studying Ukrainian in school?
A: Yeah, yeah, yeah, we had to. This is [indecipherable] the language was, you have to study a foreign language, but everybody used to study U-Ukrainian.
Q: Tell me, what did you – what language did you speak at home?
A: In – in ho – in the house? Jewi – Yiddish.
Q: Yiddish.
A: Yiddish.
Q: So that was your first language?
A: Yeah.
Q: Okay.
A: And otherwise you sa – you spoke with the Polish.
Q: Mm-hm. Had your family lived in Sanok for a long time?
A: As long as I know, yes. I don’t know if they were born he – I think my father was born there. My mother, I’m not sure.
Q: What’s your father’s name?
A: Herman Jonas, or Hirsch, whatever. In – in Yiddish Hirsch – Herman Jonas.
Q: And do you remember when he was born?
A: No.
Q: But it would have been 19th century.
A: I used to have a passport, if – if I have time, I could find it –
Q: Okay, maybe later.
A: – and let you know.
Q: Okay.
A: Yeah, but I know I have a passport, I know where it is.
Q: Okay.
A: Yeah.
Q: And your mother’s name was?
A: Rose.
Q: Rose.
A: Rose Jonas.
Q: Rose Jonas.
A: Yeah.
Q: Do you remember her maiden name?
A: Finck.
Q: Finck.
A: Finck, f-i-n-c-k.
Q: Uh-huh. And was her family also well-to-do, the family that she came from?
A: N-No. Na – na – made out barely a living, you know. Most the time my father had to help them out.
Q: Okay, so you had a well-to-do branch, and a not so well-to-do branch.
A: Yeah, yeah.
Q: Mm-hm? Go ahead.
A: They were my relatives, my uncles. They’re from my mother’s side.
Q: What kind of personalities did your parents have?
A: I don’t know I – what do you mean?
Q: Their personalities, like was – were they extroverts, were they shy people, were they very sociable people –
A: Sociable people, yeah.
Q: They were?
A: Yeah, they were, yeah.
Q: Yeah.
A: They were not loud, very respectful always [indecipherable] and charity. People came always for something, with the holidays, you were hungry, their doors are always open, you know.
Q: Were your – was your family – let’s say your social lives. Was it – was it centered around the Jewish community in Sanok?
A: Most of the time, yeah.
Q: Okay.
A: Yeah, most of the time always, yeah.
Q: So when you speak of charity work and so on, it was through the community.
A: Yeah, well, every Friday – I told you my father was rich – he used to take me or another one, put money in the envelope, and shove it underneath the door, and run away, for so – for the people. And I asked him, Daddy, who, why? They are – they are not poor, but they are ashamed to say they are hungry. The poor people, he says, th-they had what they eat. They’ll take a little from you, a little from them, th-they’ll have it. But those people was ashamed to say they don’t have it. So that’s why he took money in the envelope, put it underneath the door and run away. I se – I asked him, why are you running? I didn’t want them to think they are se – they – they owed us something for it. They don’t want to know – yeah.
Q: And do you think the people ever realized who it was who gave them –
A: Some knew, some don – didn’t.
Q: Yeah, yeah. Well, it was very thoughtful, in a very dignified way, you know.
A: Like – like, for example, there was nice people, but they couldn’t afford an – she needed a surgery on the eye; surgery back in this little town. So nobody could give them the money, so my father send her. And she was – she had surgery done, she was okay. Then we met in my – doing – after the war, he end in New York, so – her son became a dentist. Now – and I didn’t know, because the na – they changed, the name changed. And I start to give him work, because you know, implants, he was specialist in implants. And then they find out who I am, he started the oh, my mother told me you – that you – your father saved my mother’s eye and so on and so forth, you know.
Q: So it sounds like they – they instilled those values pretty early on.
A: He – money-wise, he wa – he was very nice to any ch-charity, churches, and so on.
Q: Even churches?
A: Yeah.
Q: Even churches.
A: We had – we had over there a – it was a building built on the army, I’m – you know, the Polish army. He gave them a lot of money, and because of this we have – I – a permanent lodge. We didn’t have to pay for the ticket, nothing going – yeah. The lo – lodge were only for us.
Q: Wow, a lodge?
A: Yeah.
Q: So that meant a – a building that wo –
A: Like a balcony inside and – in the main – there was like a – like – like here, Madison Square Garden or something like this, over there in the time, not so big. But this was the only –
Q: Oh, so, if you wanted to have an event there, that meant that you were able to do so.
A: Yes.
Q: Okay, and there would be no charge for it.
A: No.
Q: Okay. What was he like at home? Did you see him much at home, or was he away mostly at the office whe –
A: A-Away.
Q: Yeah?
A: Most time I saw him was on Saturday.
Q: Okay.
A: And Sundays. During the week at night – because when he came home, we were sleeping.
Q: Okay.
A: And but Saturdays and Sundays we were together.
Q: Was he – was he a person who was – it was easy to be close to?
A: Yes, yes. Everybody liked him. His w – he was very nice, very warm. And always helper, always listen.
Q: Could you tell him your problems as a chil –
A: Yes.
Q: – as a child?
A: Yeah.
Q: Yeah?
A: Yeah. Yeah, well, he never lay a hand [indecipherable] or something. He just look at you, and you know, this is it. He always kept his promise, always. But you have to be punished. Even you – you are – apologize, you are punished. Not as bad, but – and if he says I’ll buy you this and this, he always bought it.
Q: Yeah.
A: Yeah.
Q: So he was reliable.
A: And my mother was a little bit different.
Q: How was she different?
A: Tomorrow. Tomorrow never – come tomorrow, tomorrow. You want to go in the movie? Tomorrow’ll be a nicer movie. Okay, tomorrow came [indecipherable] tomorrow’ll be a better movie. Yeah. In his case was different, but if she said it, this is it, yeah.
Q: So, why do you think that was, with your mom?
A: Well, i-i – I don’t know, she was afraid to – to spend a penny, or she was afraid that something happen to the kids. She was always very careful. Don’t go here, don’t go there, don’t – you know.
Q: She was protective.
A: Very protective. I was sled riding with Manya(ph), my sister. And when you – and this – this was, I don’t know, maybe six inches full of snow, but it was winter. I ask her, are you dead? She goes, I don’t know. I said, let’s ask mommy. So we went and asked mommy if she’s dead. So this – really, she was ah – ah – oh – oh, my kids, my kids, my kids.
Q: What’s your earliest memory? Can you go somewhere and think, what’s the earliest memory you’ve got?
A: Well, I don’t know. I don’t – if I shall say it not. The thing – I – I – I was afraid to say I’m a Jew. I would like to change my religion. Because you were called stinkin’ Jew, stinkin’ Jew. You know, my father was a j – I was always a stinkin’ Jew.
Q: So the kids would say these things?
A: Yeah, in school, and – yeah, always. If – and they beat you up, you know.
Q: Did that happen?
A: Oh, almost every day, yeah. But, for example, we had somebody, our neighbor. He was shoemaker, and they were – they were poor. He has more kids tha-than – than shoes. So my father sent him to a college, like we call gymnasium.
Q: Yeah.
A: He finish college, he became a officer in the army. This what he wanted to be, okay? We – and we go to school, and there was another boy, a non-Jewish boy, start to fighted me; he was much bigger than. This guy was looking. When the other guy says – he start to bleed, then he stopped the –
Q: When the other guy started to bleed.
A: Yeah.
Q: But not you.
A: No. Then he stopped it. Said, oh, that’s enough, that’s enough. And it on and on and on like this. You know, I’m handy?
Q: Mm-hm.
A: Everything. I – when I was in school, I don’t know, was I, eight years old? Whatever. They came out with a picture with the first president of Poland. Well he used – where he was born, he used to live. And they give us bark from a tree, right? I made a house, it came out – just a copy of it. So they took it, they put it in a museum, and they told me, it won’t be under your name because you are Jewish.
Q: Ohh.
A: So now you know how – how nice Poland was to us.
Q: Yeah. Those are quite bitter things.
A: Yeah, we were – we were – we were never teenagers, we were never kids, because we all – while you were playing we are afraid somebody came in with a stone over there.
Q: And was that to all your brothers and sisters too, they had similar experiences?
A: Yeah, yeah, sure, you know, thi-thi-this was normal. This was normal, yeah.
Q: Were there any kids who were Polish, not Jewish, who you knew they were nice, and they were friends?
A: Yes, yes, yes, I had – I still have friends. They were very close with me, yeah, very nice. And th – his mother, when I was playing with him, his mother once say – she didn’t know that I am on – in the side. She says, don’t play with him. They’re all a shochet. You know what a shochet is? The guy who kills – cut the chickens, the animals.
Q: Kosher.
A: Kosher, yeah. Even when we were so close, yeah.
Q: That must have been quite chilling, such things. When you’re a child, you don’t understand them.
A: Well, they didn’t know what the mother was talking about.
Q: Yeah.
A: I did. I was scared from this day on, I was so scared to look at her, you know, because –
Q: Yeah.
A: The only good time I had was Christmas.
Q: And why was that?
A: Because when Christmas – when they on the first night Christmas and they saw a Jew, was lucky, you are lucky, because Jesus was a Jew. So then they were, come in, come in, they have cookies, the whole thing. I didn’t know why, but then when I grew up, I find out why, because Jesus were a Jew, and according to the thing, they say maybe this is Jesus, you know, a reincarnation of him. So this is very nice to me.
Q: It must have been very strange.
A: Hm?
Q: It must have been very strange.
