United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Walter Meyer
April 28, 1999
RG-50.549.02*0041
PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of an audio taped interview with Walter Meyer, conducted by Ginger Miles on April 28, 1999 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview took place in Austin, Texas and is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
Interview with Walter Meyer
April 28, 1999 Beginning Tape One, Side A
Question: This tape is a part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum Jeff and Toby Herr collection. This is an interview with Walter Meyer, conducted by Ginger Miles, on April 28th, 1999, in Austin, Texas, at Walter’s home. This is a follow-up interview to a United States Holocaust Memorial Museum videotape interview conducted with Walter Meyer, in 1996. The United States Holocaust Memorial Museum gratefully acknowledges Jeff and Toby Herr for making this interview possible. This is tape one, side one.
Answer: All right. My name is Walter Meyer, M-e-y-e-r.
Q: Okay. And I -- We’re going to start with the post-war, or really, I know the story, a very touching story about the Red Cross taking you home, and I wanted to ask -- my first question is, when do you identify the end of the war, or liberation period, as some call it?
A: Well, when the Americans occupied the city of Düsseldorf --
Q: I should ask, where were you?
A: I was in the basement of my house, because the city -- the Americans were across the Rhine, not only was the city bombarded by the air, but also by artillery, so we were in the basement of the apartment building in which we lived.
Q: When you say we?
A: That is my parents and I, plus the other tenants.
Q: Your mother had gotten tenants for -- in the same house, or --
A: Well, it was an apartment house of six apartments.
Q: Okay. And going back just a little bit, when the Red Cross took you to your mother -- to your home, is that right? Do you remember any particular impact that the Red Cross had on your rescue? A lot of people have memories about the Red Cross and their work.
A: Well, it was not actually the Red Cross. The Red Cross wanted to take me to a hospital and I insisted, I said, “No, I am dying, I want to go home.” So I -- An old taxi cab, converted into somewhat of an ambulance took me home and I told the driver, “Go and ask for my father. Don’t shock my mother, because I haven’t seen her for some time.” And -- So, later on, I heard he went up, asked for my father, wasn’t there, then he told my mother that he had something for her, and my mother thought that it was a suitcase that my father had sent from France. And he had finally said, “Look, why don’t you go with me?” So I -- my mother walked down. It was snowing, and she looked into the car and she was a little confused because she didn’t recognize me. And so then I told her, “Mother,” and finally, after she looked three times, says, “Walter?” And that is when she called a neighbor to have to carry me in, and I remember the neighbor touched my legs and they were inflamed and extremely painful. So, eventually, they got me in and someone in the train had given me an apple, that caused me to have a little diarrhea, so I asked them to take me to the bathroom. And shortly thereafter, the bell rang, it was my father and my mother yelled, “Paul, Walter is here.” So he came and he saw me and then he just couldn’t control himself and cried for a long time. Then they sh --
Q: Why do you think he was crying?
A: Because of my condition.
Q: He also did not expect to see you?
A: No. Maybe three days later, two policemen came looking for me, and my father said, “Yes, he is here.” And he brought them in and he uncovered me, said, “Do you want to take him like that?” And I think I weighed about 78 pounds. And one of them knew me because I was a star swimmer, and they told my father, “Nevermind, we’re going to say that -- that he was not here.” So they left and then we accommodate -- accommodate ourself in the basement. Maybe a day, maybe two, maybe three days later, my father, upon my mother’s suggestion, tried to find a doctor who assured my parents that there was no hope. So a priest was called, who gave me the last sacraments, and -- but obviously I didn’t die. And then when the Americans marched in, I think it was April the 12th, my father went to see the commanding officer, told him about me and they came with the military ambulance, and took me to a German hospital which was occupied by an American medica -- medical company, and I was with them, ooh, for quite some time.
Q: How far from Düsseldorf, from your parents, were you?
A: Oh, three blocks.
Q: Oh, that’s wonderful.
A: Yeah, the hospital was kind of --
Q: So the hospital was taken over then, by Americans?
A: Yes.
Q: And did you say that there was a Jewish man in charge, a doctor?
A: Yes, Major Hermann.
Q: And one of the questions that I wanted to ask you is -- is a long time sort of prospective from the post-war to the present time is, from here, from this doctor, have you experienced prejudice because you are a German in certain circumstances, and if so, where?
A: Oh well, once with Major Hermann. We didn’t -- It didn’t mean enough to him that I had suffered and that I was not, in quote, a Nazi. I was a German and that was enough for him, he being Jewish. After that -- No, I think -- Well, of course, when I traveled in France, at that time it was near impossible to tell somebody, I am German, they would have liquidated you. So I traveled through France as a Frenchman. I have participated in conversations like, these Goddamn Germans, these horrible, these this and this and so on and so forth. So, except -- until when I came to South America, which is about as pro-German as you can get, in any part of South America, and quite anti-Semitic. So as a German, no, except for the -- the -- the time immediately after the war in other European countries, where I didn’t dare say that I was German, other than that no, I had -- there were no repercussions because of my heritage, no.
Q: I want to go back to your being in the hospital and three blocks away and how long you were in the hospital and did you see your parents? A: Yeah, my parents came from time to time and I remember that I gained, oh sometimes as much as a pound and a half a day. And one day the American doctor told me that my heart would not support so much gain of weight and that I had to get up and I thought that was a bad joke. But I remember h-he telling me that I had to jump on one leg 13 times and then on the other one, where little by little, I went -- some GIs drove me around in a wheelchair and I would do sketches of the GIs. And then, maybe it was two or three months later, I walked with this cane and I was released and I was then with my parents. And Americans, shortly thereafter, were replaced by the British.
Q: In the hospital?
A: No, not in the hospital, as occupation troop. The -- The -- si -- The American military zone -- part of the American military zone became British. They -- They re-divided geographic areas, where the Americans stayed in Frankfurt, Heidelberg and so on and the British used another part of Germany and of course the Russians took all of East Germany.
Q: You had quite a -- a rich life since, which is why I wanted to start here, and I also had a question, although I understand that you were a person who loved adventure, I wondered how long you stayed at home, and why did you go?
A: Situation in Germany was rather unbearable, Black Market, one German would denounce another German for being a member of the Nazi party, for having done this or that. The entire country was destroyed, Düsseldorf 75 percent. There didn’t seem to be a future. Money did not exist, it was bartering. Coffee, cigarettes, butter were the main items for bartering. My parents had lost my brother, who had fallen to his death in the Alps. My mother continuously cried. So it was a period of depression and even though at that time it was an impossibility to leave, you couldn’t leave -- you couldn’t go in the street after 10 o’clock. But somehow I flirted with the idea of going to America. And anybody with whom I would have shared the idea would have declared me insane. I went to see a teacher of mine, an old teacher who -- I understand that he had an estate, or his family had an estate in America. And I didn’t know that much about the difference of South America and North America, to me America was America. I went to see him, and I remember he asked me, “Where do you want to go, eventually?” “Well,” I said, “America.” “What part of America?” And I said North America just to give him an answer. He said, “Well, I’m very sorry, but my family has an estate in -- close to Buenos Aires, in Argentina.” Then I went to see my father, and I told him that -- that I was going to try to leave. Said, “You know that’s impossible.” Well, I said, “I’m going to try.” And he said that, “If I didn’t know you, I would say you are crazy, but -- but there’s no need for me to say anything. All I say that whatever person you meet, just expect them to be no good and if they are good, you’re going to have a very pleasant surprise.” That was his advice. I had previously tried -- well, let me explain that many Germans in large cities, knowing that the cities were to be or were being bombed, took certain items of value and shipped them to relatives in rural areas, which happened to be the Russian zone. My parents had shipped a suitcase to some friends. And going to the Russian zone was quite an adventure and I went to the Russian zone several times. And that itself is quite a story.
Q: Was this the Russian zone in Germany?
A: Russian zone in Germany.
Q: And that meant that the Russians were in charge of everything [indecipherable]
A: They were the occupying force, and they were terrible. So, we’re -- going to the Russian zone was in itself something like going to a foreign country. I had gone there twice, so I figured that somehow I sh -- I should be able to go. I had an address of a relative of a friend in Belgium.
Q: What was your motive for going?
A: Oh, I was sick and tired of Germany, of the situation in Germany, thought there must be better places in the world then, than corruption, Black Market, degeneration, etcetera, etcetera, etcetera.
Q: So you said goodbye to your parents?
A: Well, I didn’t say, excuse me, I didn’t say goodbye, I told my mother that I was going to a water polo championship, and she said, “There’s nothing like that.” “Yeah,” I said, “yeah, yeah, yeah. I’ll be back next week.” I came to see her again seven years later. So she didn’t know that I was gone. She thought I was going to be away for a few days.
Q: Did you tell that to her to protect her, if anyone asked, or --
A: Oh, yeah, I -- I -- no, I told that to her because she would not have allowed me to leave, and I didn’t want her to cry. So I stow away to Achen, which is right on the border, and there I -- I had some cigarettes with me that I gave to a railroad employee, and I asked him -- I spoke to him with a French accent and I told him that I had been in Germany as a French prisoner of war and that I’d fallen in love with a German girl and I’d come to see her and I needed to go back. And I wondered whether he could help me, whether there was a train going across. He told me about a cargo train and well, I hid in that cargo train and went to Belgium. I went to see an old farmer. Matter of fact, I visited the farmer’s son last year. And he told me, “Don’t come up, they’re looking for Germans all over the place, so --
Q: How did he know you?
A: He didn’t know me. I told him who I was. He was the cousin or nephew of a lady in our neighborhood. You have to underst --
Q: Oh, sorry.
A: -- You have to understand the situation. The border towns in Germany and Belgium, they were German during the Kaiser. After the Kaiser, they -- they became Belgium. Hitler took it back, and after Hitler lost, they returned to Belgium. So those areas, like Alsace-Lorraine, they all speak German and they’re probably more German than Belgian, or Germ -- [indecipherable] so anyway, he gave me some sandwich, an apple, and told me that I should wait for the milk truck. It took me to Liège. Well, at -- at noon time, I was in -- in Brussels and I stayed a few days in Brussels, visiting with a friend of my father. Then I went to France and eventually I became a sailor. That went on until December of ’48, when I stow awayed on a -- on a Dutch freighter and went to South America.
Q: Before we get to South America, I -- I was interested that you learned English from American GIs. Could you --
A: Well, I didn’t learn from them, let’s say that I progressed, cause I had had English in school, and I was -- I’d always been a linguist, so languages are not of any difficulty to me, and so, with the GIs, I had a very good opportunity to practice and to learn more vocabulary and maybe become a little more Americanized in -- in my speech pattern.
Q: And this is while you were in the hospital?
A: True, true.
Q: So, how did you get to South America now?
A: Well, I stow awayed on a Dutch freighter and went first to Brazil.
Q: How -- Do you remember the name of the freighter, or --
A: Yeah.
Q: [indecipherable]
A: Par-Parkhaven. Pay -- P-a-r-k-h-a-v-e-n. One of the oldest ships on the ocean at the time, was still a coal ship, and then a -- there weren’t too many coal ships around any more.
Q: Coal, c-o-a-l?
A: Yeah.
Q: And from what port did you --
A: From Antwerp.
Q: How do you stow away?
A: Well, at the time, in different ports of Europe, I went aboard ships, and -- well, the first time I went on a ship was I worked in a nightclub in Bordeaux drawing portraits and a captain walked in and he was -- he was quite drunk already, but I did his picture anyway and he paid me and he drank more, and eventually he was unable to -- to walk, and I felt sorry. And in port cities, there’s always danger of being attacked. So, I took him under my arm and took him to his ship, which was the Silver Ocean, a Swedish ship, and oh, it must have been three in the morning, and when I woke up, we were on the ocean. He looked at me and said, “Who are you?” And I told him, he said, “Well, if you helped me to come aboard the ship, I ought to help you.” And he gave me a seaman’s book, which is kind of an ID card for sailors, and with a seaman’s book, you can actually work on almost any ship that needs help, but I lost the seaman’s book eventually. Anyway, with him I went to Casablanca. I went back to continental Europe and I was trying to stow away on an Argentine ship, but the captain kind of smelled --
Q: What part of eur -- you mean you went directly back on that same ship to return to --
A: No, I went -- went back on another ship and went to Toulouse. From Toulouse I think he went to La Rochelle. La Rochelle to Lavre, and I went eventually -- went to Rotterdam, Amsterdam and eventually I came back to Anverb and I received at the post office, letter from my father, who said that, “Dear Walter, there -- you will not be able to leave Europe for America. Your mother has baked special cookies for Christmas and I ask you to come home and be with us for Christmas.” And I wrote back, “If I don’t get a ship until next week, I’ll be home.” And that’s what I would have done, but on December the 16th, I was on the Parkhaven and stow awayed on the Parkhaven. I had someone who helped me. The way it goes when you stow away from a European port, you try to stay hidden for at least two days, until you’re far away from the British Isle, because if not, speed boats will pick you up and bring you back. Captains hate stowaways aboard.
Q: Could I ask you, before we get too far on this ship, did your father know that you were leaving, whereas your mother did not? He knew where to write you.
A: Yes. Oh, by that time -- by that time, of course after one week, I didn’t return and I sent letters home, s-so oh yes, my mother knew I was gone. She still hoped that I would be back soon. And so, on this ship, I think the second day, the chief steward came and discovered me. The beds generally have curtains so the light doesn’t bother you so much and he drew the curtains and he saw me there. And they convinced him not to report me to the captain. By they, I mean the few guys who knew about me. And so he said, “Well, can’t leave him here, you have to find another hiding place.” So they put me to the most horrible place of all places, and that is where the propeller of the ship is. Well there is a -- there’s a small ladder going down if you have to repair the propeller, and there’s some old, big ropes lying there. And I was there, well, I guess a day and a night. And boy, you could always feel the water comes almost to your feet and then goes back down and it’s solid black. I mean, a -- a -- a dungeon is nothing in comparison.
Q: Did you have food?
A: Yeah, they -- they -- they dropped some food down, or they let it down with a rope, so I ate a little bit. Well, anyway, after that time never passed, they finally got me out and -- and then took me to the captain and the captain, remember asked me about my nationality and I told him I was French.
Q: You had no passport or anything like that?
