Ina Weiss 8/25/89 #99 Page 1
Q: Where were you born?
A: In Berlin...
Q: ...needs translation...then asks her to speak English...and WH comments on how ‘beautifully’ she has kept her documents in a folder. (tape difficult to hear)...in 1949 you came here...on a visitor’s visa...you lived on 97th Street...you were born August 18th, 1924...during the war, where were you?
A: I the camps. . four years I was in camps...in Theresienstadt in 1941...
Q: Did you have brothers and sisters?
A: I have one brother who is one and a half year older than me and he came here...in 1939. It’s a little bit mixed up. Let me tell you from the beginning, and it will be easier for you. I got born in 1924 in Berlin, Germany, and we moved to Leipzig and I was six years old and I went to school over there, my father had a very high position over there. He was the Director of the (name inaudible) Printing firm...a publishing house...he was the first Director over there and in 1933, immediately, of March, they found, when Hitler came...they want to hang him. He was very much insulted about this behavior of the Germans, and he still says that this is not the Germans, these are only the Nazis. And (laughs) then he couldn’t believe, but we went immediately to Czechoslovakia...I had a little brother...but he had a defect. He couldn’t walk straight...he didn’t make it...and I got very much involved in the Zionist Organization...but I was too young to go Aliyah...so I stayed with my parents. I wanted to go to England with the children’s transport...but my parents didn’t agree, so I signed on my own, without permission, and I had to go on the 3rd of September, 1939...and the war broke out the 1st of September. So, everything gets, very, uh, - .
Q: You couldn’t go.
A: ...my parents didn’t want to send me alone...and my brother went...and today, probably that I am alive, I’m glad that I didn’t do it, or didn’t come out, that I could go to England, or otherwise probably, I would eat my conscience all my life that I left them against their wish. And, I never would know what happens to them. What happened, we went in December, 1941 we went to Theresienstadt. It was my little brother, my mother, father and me. And my grandmother came later. And I spent over there, almost three years...and worked, and was very often, very sick, and it is just unbelievable that I lost everything, (inaudible) A lot of operations...and I was never sick in my life before.
Q: Did your family survive the war?
A: No, nobody survived. My father died in Theresienstadt (inaudible) and my mother came to the transport to Auschwitz...in May, 1944 and I went as a volunteer with her, I wanted to go with her, I didn’t want to leave her alone with my little brother. With the little brother and my mother came only three days later, but I met her and I could probably help her a little bit, even though I was again, very, very sick over in Auschwitz. Always high fever, and what came from everywhere, But I had a lot of good friends who helped me overcome this and I have overcome all the selections from Dr. Mengele.
Q: You think that you owe much of your survival to your friends?
A: Oh, yes. They are not living any more. They don’t live any more. They just had the opportunity to give a potato or something. (inaudible) It helps very much. And the medical men for the awful disease...(they helped me to not) come through the selections and the medical men helped me, and they had to pay the doctor for getting some medical (inaudible).
Q: Did you find that most of the people in the camps helped each other?
A: They had no opportunity. They had no opportunity. I, from the beginning, still have my friends, and after I came out...I had a very, very good friend, and we were always together. (inaudible) Hannah Greenfield, we were three (inaudible), the other girl lives in San Francisco today. And I only called her now, when I was in Los Angeles, I called her after 40 years. She’s quite happy, but our different life, after the war, she lives a very quiet life, and has no children and no desire for anything else, just to make a good living over there. Very modest, and probably, we have now in connection, but I am a little bit afraid that I have nothing to tell her. Nothing is of interest to her, what’s going on here and we are very much involved in Israel, with everything what’s going around. That’s not only my personal life, ‘cause it’s still for my children and grandchildren, and I’m worried’.
Q: ...right after the war ended, at Theresienstadt, where were you? You were in a D.P. camp, afterwards, right?
A: We survived in Bergen-Belsen, and Bergen-Belsen after people left, it was a D.P. camp (for people) who couldn’t go home, they stayed in the camp and waited to go or to Palestine or to somewhere else.
Q: So, what happened to you then? Were you planning to go to Palestine?
A: The trouble was, that at that time I had the opportunity to go to Palestine. Even my brother from here, who was in the British army, the Jewish Brigade, and he came to visit me and he said that he can take me to Palestine now, like his wife, we had the same name. We were in Belgium and the rabbi would give us the certificate that he can come back with his wife. But, first of all, I was already, I dreamed I was for many, many weeks (inaudible...) and I wanted to go home. Always, I had the feeling I had to go home. Almost four years, and I didn’t realize that I had no home. Actually, I knew I have no home. I left my mother in Auschwitz with the little boy, and I knew what will happen to them, I know, my father died, and actually I knew I had no home. Anyhow, I wanted so much to go home to Prague. And when I woke up, I saw that I want (inaudible) to bring me to Sweden, and (inaudible...) and I couldn’t walk yet, and I didn’t want to go over there. (inaudible) Life was very difficult after for me. And now comes even the point, why I immigrated to America if it is of interest to you.
Q: It is of great interest.
A: In Bergen-Belsen, in this camp, it was 3 months after the liberation, everyone could go home, wherever he wants to go, so there were signs to Poland, to Czechoslovakia, to Germany, wherever they wanted to go, we had to stand in line. And to tell where you got born. I had no citizenship, because the Germans took the citizenship from the German Jews...I was stateless...so when I stand in line to go back to Prague, they ask me where I got born. I said, ‘In Berlin,’ and then I.. . said I was ‘German, but I am stateless now.’ So they told me that they don’t take me back. I can’t go over there, to stay in Germany, because I am German. I said, ‘Well, I don’t stay for 5 minutes longer in Germany than I have to. I am so – I am not, I am not, I am not, I am not staying here.’ I just wouldn’t stay over there. I had not the strength to go to Palestine. It was for me, to go to Palestine, to go to Palestine, to go in the kibbutz, to work very hard, to look for water, I mean that was the idea (inaudible) and I had no strength and I had only the feeling that I wanted to be alone. Want to be alone, not again with the communal living. And a lot of girls around, and quarreling, and telling, I wanted only to be alone. It was my desire. Very strong.
Q: Could you have come to Israel and not worked on a kibbutz?
A: No, I didn’t know this. You see, my idea was always, that I come here and all the girls together, we were together and that was – I couldn’t understand that I could live like a normal person here.
Q: You brother, did he go back to Israel?
A: Yah, sure. He lives here.
Q: Did you think that maybe he wouldn’t be able to take care of you?
A: No...and I even didn’t think so much that I have to work for my own living. I didn’t think so. I was just, sick and tired of all the – lot of people, (inaudible) and I thought that I go home...but the trouble started to go home, and they didn’t want to take me. And the next day, I thought to myself...’Who know who I am?’ No one knows who I am. So, I went again, and stepped in line, and that’s it. I told the girl I got born in Prague, and that I’m Czech. Finished...I told (this story) to the editor of Yad Vashem, (name inaudible)...and she says, she was the scriber, and she were writing, it was her handwriting, and she was writing it in Bergen-Belsen, and she told me, ‘You know, you think that they didn’t recognize you?’
Q: That you were not Czech?
A: Yes. That I’m not the same who was the day before. And she said that...the British high officer said, ‘Look at this young German, beautiful girl. She is here again.’ And they made like they wouldn’t recognize me. And I came back, the trouble started when I came back to Prague...the Germans recognized me...from the passport...they make a judgement against me and I get at least two years in prison...for making a false statement...I was already crying...and I wanted to talk to someone, and there was a young lawyer, and woman, and I ask if I can talk to her alone...so I told her the truth, that I lived for so many years in Prague and I want to come back here, I have all my friends, I were together with the Czech girls, and I have nothing to look for in Germany. So she told me, ‘You know, I can’t help you. I can help you only to leave the papers on my desk, and you have to try to go over the border somewhere. And I keep it here on my desk.’ And that’s why I ask for an affidavit. I could get it very easy. The affidavit from my cousin and the visa very quickly, and the quota from the Germans for America was very big...and I got it in 6 weeks...
Q: Did you leave from Bremerhaven?
A: No. I had more problems...so I went from Sweden. (? Guetenberg?) The S.S. Gripsholm. That’s why I left, actually, for America...(but) I didn’t want to leave, for I was in love already with my husband now. And he was very, very sick with T.B. and he was really very, very, - I had only, Sweden once I was in a sanitorium and I had nothing very serious...but he was really, very, very sick and the very, - at the beginning, was no hopes, that he was for 6 years in a camp.
Q: Which camp?
A: Everywhere...they took him in 1939...as a political prisoner...and he got four years, to sit alone...and then they found out he’s Jewish...and they said, after the war he would serve his four years, so he had 2 and a half years, and then three and a half years in ? Bunamonowiecz? and he came to Bergen-Belsen and we came together back.
Q: That’s where you met him?
A: Yeh...
Q: Did you leave with him for America?
A: No. My husband was sick. He stayed in the sanitorium. I had to leave him. I couldn’t get married. I had no papers, and I had to leave him and I was very sorry, but I had no other chance. So when I came to America, first I started to work very hard to make a lot of money...
Q: You arrived in New York?
A: Yes...
Q: Did you see the Statue of Liberty?
A: I was very excited when we arrived in New York in the evening, and we came only in the morning to the port, so we stayed all night outside the pier, and it was extremely exciting for me. For the, all the big lights, and the highways, you see it, and Europe was very poor. I left it very poor. I wanted to leave Europe. I was very angry about Europe. I couldn’t...forgive to the, to all (inaudible). There were good Czechs, there were good things, but I had not the feeling that I can live over there. I wanted to leave Europe. But I wanted to live with my husband together somewhere.
Q: You came in 1947. In March...who greeted you at the pier? HIAS?
A: No, I came on my own.
Q: So no one was there when you came?
A: No...I didn’t take anything from any Jewish organization. My cousin sent me the ticket. And then friends of him waited for me on the pier. I didn’t know them before. And, until today they are my best friends...and we just went to America, he died, so I went to her to visit her, in the States, after 40 years now I went to visit her.
Q: You mean you hadn’t been to America for 40 years?
A: No. Never. I have no money. And no desire. I was so busy here.
Q: You came to America, and where did you live when you first came?
A: These friends who expected me. I went to live in that place. I was not very happy about it. I had an uncle over there, and I have this cousin, who was very sick which I didn’t know. And, actually, I didn’t want from anybody, anything. I’m very proud...but I lived for the first three months in that place...in Washington Heights...570 Fort Washington Avenue...
Q: Did you read the Auf Bau?
A: No. I didn’t read the German paper...I read the ‘P.M.’...they forced me to read, but my head was quite on a different - .
Q: where was your head?
A: My head was in Czechoslovakia...(inaudible). In the beginning, I suffered from the light nature of the American. Everything was only on the top.
Q: Superficial.
A: They had – superficial. All my friends were refugees...they came from Vienna, from Prague, from Belzig, from everywhere, but I had no friend who got born in America. It was in some way, I had the feeling that I can’t talk, they are not listening, and they were not listening. I mean, not that I were talking about the camp so much. Absolutely not! I knew that no one will likes to hear something, but they were so interfering, they were so busy with themselves. Even the people I worked and so. The music were different. I mean, everything was different. And, I don’t say that I’m right, for today I see it quite different. I see it’s very happy if people can be happy with such a easy going, not going very deep in everything. It’s very good. It’s much better. But at the time I was very deep, and very – very sad. I mean, I can’t explain it. If you would read what I wrote in German, in my (inaudible) it was, - it came out from me, for myself, but not for others. Anyhow, I was very glad in America.
Q: Glad?
A: I mean, glad I came to America.
Q: Even with all these problems?
A: Yes. That is different. I got the flat in Manhattan from my cousin who had to leave. And, I lived on my own. I started working on the third day when I arrived in America.
Q: Doing what?
A: Then I went with the Sunday Times and looked for ‘Filing Clerk,’ or for something, and I was very happy that the cheapest department store in New York, ‘Klein’s’ – 14th Street, they took me for picking up the dresses, I think. (inaudible) and I was very happy that they took me, but I was quite unhappy after the first week. For, I couldn’t stand so much on my feet, and my back were hurting, and the people were so coming and going and so unpersonal, and I didn’t understand even their language, and when I had twenty minutes to have a rest, I didn’t understand all the automates, and I had no one to ask. For all the girls who was over there with 16 years, they, - I got quite depressed, that I saw some very, very good looking refugees working over there, and I said, from so many years, I have nothing else to do, just to push the dresses, and so...I was very depressed from this work, and I went to the Personnel Officer again, and told her, a very nice woman...’ You have something where I can sit a little bit? I’m just not able to stand so much and the Manager doesn’t leave me even to stand up.’ So she told me if I know how to sew, and I said, ‘Yes.’ So I went down to the basement and for another week, I stayed over there, almost suffocating from all the old dressed I had to repair...and again I went to the Personnel Officer, ‘Do you have something else for me? I can probably do something.’ And she told me, ‘You know you are so nice and I will, in this Department store, there were no job for you from me, but I will ask my friend.’ ...and there was an International stamp exhibition and I went there and I met a lot of people from Czechoslovakia who knew my father very well...he collected stamps...and I said, ‘Don’t talk so much. I am looking for a job.’ So, immediately I got a very good job for the first time, for three weeks for someone who went on vacation...and I told the Personnel Manager at Klein’s, and she told me that she has a job for me in a fur store in Fifth Avenue, her friend want to take me already for $35 a week, five days. And so I told her, ‘Thank you very, very much Lily, for all efforts, but I found a job.’ ...so I started to work in America with stamps...I couldn’t go in the rush hour, it was depressing for me, again, so I worked different hours...I worked very, very many hours. It was downtown, next to Wall Street...there were all stamp dealers on one street...and then I took work home, and so it came out that I worked another couple of hours and made a lot of money. I’d go beyond $100 a week. And I needed for myself, not even $5. I didn’t bought for myself anything. I went only to eat in Chock full of Nuts for a soup...and I was always invited to these friends, who they never let me, any weekend to be alone. Not any holiday, Jewish holiday...they kept me like their child. I only found out now that they are only ten years older than me. But at that time, I had the feeling they were like my parents...so I had a dream, I want to bring my husband over, and so on. When my husband came here with the Jewish Brigade. No one ask him whether he sick. Actually, he’s an invalid on his legs. They would never have allowed him to come in to America.
Q: He had T.B.?
A: He had T.B. and it’s not only the T.B. He had a very special T.B. and he’s until today, not breathing (right). The Americans never would let him come to immigrate to America. But I had illusions, and I thought if he goes to Cuba, so I can afterwards to – I had already a job in Miami Beach. Everything I arranged, he should come. But the Czech didn’t give him the visa...the passport.
Q: Did he go to Cuba?
A: No. I almost lost everything what I paid over there...the deposit, the lawyer, and everything...when the Czech didn’t give him the passport.
SIDE ONE.
SIDE TWO.
Q: ...you decided to go to Israel after being in America in order to join your husband-to-be. You were not married then, but when you heard he went to Israel, you decided - .
A: I decided that if I go to Israel, I never go back if we understand each other after two years. I wasn’t (? sure) that I will stay alive if I don’t get married with him. Not that I could get married in America, everyone thought that I’m crazy...(inaudible) I had a very good professional position. I was already useful worker...I worked only with stamps, my English was poor and I didn’t want to make any other work, but I understood something from stamps...
Q: Did you have people in America who wanted to go out with you?
A: Oh, yes. But I almost didn’t go out because I was afraid for myself. (laughs)...I was very young you see, and – so, I even didn’t want to come in the temptation for myself, that I put myself in.
Q: Your husband is from Berlin?
A: No, my husband is from Czechoslovakia. He lived in Prague but got born in a little town.
Q: Did he have a Zionist background?
A: Absolute not.
Q: He only came to Israel because he couldn’t get into America?
A: No. But we wanted to meet somewhere. If you want to hear, I even sent him a visa to Ecuador...Yes, I could buy it for $300 a visa to Ecuador and the French gave him a transit visa. Everything for money. Everything for money...Sweden wanted $1,200 for a transit visa and a ticket to Cuba which was $600.
Q: Why bother with Ecuador if you could go to Israel?
A: No. It was not a question. To Israel, was only the first year. There were no ideas still from Israel.
Q: It was ’48.
A: That’s it.
Q: But once Israel became an independent country, and then the war broke out, did you then stop the idea of going to Ecuador?
A: Yes. Now, I had – I didn’t even wanted to go to Ecuador. Or to stay over there. I wanted a little piece in this world where I can meet him again.
Q: And then you would decide what to do permanently.
A: And even after one year, you see, after that I wanted to go back like a visitor...(inaudible) but in ’48 the Russian came to Czechoslovakia and then it was too dangerous for me to go back and spend all my money. I mean a lot of money what I saved so hard. So I thought it would be much better to use this money and to try much stronger to bring him out.
Q: What year did he get out of Czechoslovakia?
A: In the first of January in ’49 and I came in March.
Q: ...so you took the Marine Carp to Israel...
A: Yes...the trip was very, very good. I was not sick at all...I can’t explain this to no one, and no one can explain. And there were a lot of young people, young American people. I got friends with a lot of American young people who came to Israel and almost, everyone was much deeper from these American, because they were Jewish and if they decided already to come to Israel, so they had an idea.
Q: So you were a Zionist and an idealist, right?
A: Yes.
Q: And you came to America. Did you feel that America did not give you enough of a feeling of security or identity as a Jew? Was that your feeling?
A: No, absolute not.
Q: In other words, if wasn’t for the fact that your husband had been in Israel, you probably would not have gone.
A: That I don’t know, but later on, probably not after two years. I was very strong in my feelings that’s like a Jew. I want to live here. But I had not the physical and mentally, strength at that time to leave everything in America in ’49 and to start again to decide, and to start again a new life. After I had already a new life. I had a flat, and I had very jobs, I had good friends already, and I enjoyed – I mean, most what I enjoyed in America was the freedom, what I never had.
Q: So, in other words, it was really your husband who was the major force in coming here.
A: ...if he would come to America. I’m not sure whether I would not come again here to Israel. But, at that time, it was still war here in Israel. And, it was still, nothing to eat. And again, all the rations and so on. Everything what I forgot already, and left behind me. And it left a bad taste, you know? To decide to go again, means a lot of strength.
Q: Did you ever meet anyone here in Israel, who came from Europe and then, did like you did, came to Israel in ’48 and ’49...came from Europe to America, and from America to Israel but in the early years, who decided that they wanted a more Jewish life or whatever their reason was.
A: Personally, I don’t know...
Q: ...you have children?
A: One daughter...two grandchildren...
Q: Did she say to you, ‘What would it have been like to live in America?
AS: Yes, she sometimes said what would happen, it would be probably better if you would (laughs) stay in America. But, I’m telling the truth. I arrived here, it was very, very hard. I mean, there are so many details, and it was very hard. And, I never considered for one moment, that it was not the right step I made. When I came here, I felt here is my home. I mean, I really, I came, we rented a room and the people were very, very nice. (In (inaudible) next to Haifa). And people here, really helped everyone, to each other, and we met a lot of neighbors and friends and – I mean, probably I am a lucky person. I must point out that wherever, and wherever I was, and even in the camp, I always met, if it was the worse time for me, I met persons who helped me. That’s true. That didn’t start in America. It didn’t start when I came here. We lived together in this house for 30 years. With, like an adopted mother. Her children stayed in Auschwitz. And we met and we lived here together like one family. She is now in an older’s home, and in a very good condition, and everything is okay, but we lived 30 years like a real family together. And, it was very good for me that I have someone, like a mother who can talk everything, and you have feelings.
Q: Did you feel that the people here were nicer than the people in America?
A: Yes...I feel absolute at home here. Here I can choose who I want, you see, and we have very, very good friends. And, I’m now talking about the first days when I arrived, I had the feelings that I’m here at home. And, if you want to know, I decided immediately, that I’m not going back. And, I wrote a nice letter to the State Department.
Q: What did you say to them?
A: I thanked them for the hospitality that I had in America, that I enjoyed very much...and I’m not coming back, not that I don’t like America, (inaudible) I feel that it’s my home here. .
Q: How soon after you came here did you write that letter?
A: In ’49...March or April...
Q: You didn’t speak Hebrew?
A: I didn’t speak Hebrew...no one spoke Hebrew at that time. I learned Yiddish, not to talk, but to understand at least...at that time everyone was a refugee. I mean, I had not to feel – my Hebrew is very poor today, either.
Q: But in America, also the community was made up of refugees...and so you had a small community there, but you still didn’t feel at home there.
A: You know, the difference is, I’ll tell you. It’s very hard to tell. If you have something to give, you feel much better. If you always taking, I was quite poor in America. And, everyone liked me very much and I got used to that I’m invited. I never could invite anyone to me, I had only one room, and, a one room flat, and no one would even – they were all in much better positions. And I felt very good with them, But I always had the feelings that I’m the taker, and not the giver.
Q: Well, wouldn’t the idea that you want to be proud, and independent, make it more likely that you would like a country that was proud and independent. In other words, your personal approach to life was, ‘I don’t want to have help from Jewish organizations.’ You said it before. And ‘don’t want individuals to do me favors all the time.’
A: I didn’t need. If I would need, I probably would take.
Q: But you have here, when you don’t need.
A: Yes, exactly when I came here to Israel, there was (? needs translation) they wanted to give us a lot of things without any money. A bed, I don’t know what else. I didn’t take it, for I didn’t need it. I mean, I had what I needed, and I was very lucky afterwards that I always could say that I never took anything, and I was never in the – here in these camps, people were waiting for flats. Which were too, much easier. But I said, ‘I’m not living for one day in a camp, if I have not.’ So we took a room, I worked, my husband worked.
Q: ...your husband is retired...what kind of work did he do?
A: When he arrived in Israel, he started like a welder, even with his lungs. For that was only what he learned in the concentration camp. He was the best worker (inaudible)...he worked like a (inaudible) for the Army. And we moved to Jerusalem in ’56 when they started building the Hadassah building here, in ’56 and he was responsible for the construction...
Q: How do you feel about the relationship between Germany and Israel now? That Germany helped Israel and all those years? Does that make you uncomfortable?
A: You know, it made me very, very uncomfortable, but I knew it has to be, otherwise we wouldn’t - .
Q: Wouldn’t survive. When you think of Germans now, though, today’s generation, do you in any way relate it to the previous generation?
A: I have no (inaudible).
Q: No real strong feeling about it?
A: No. I don’t say that all the Germans - .
Q: Are prejudice.
A: Are prejudice. I have no prejudices (inaudible). There are working Germans here, even in the Hadassah, and no one even invited them, and I felt guilty. And it’s very funny that we, who made the linoleum you know, that they worked here, and no one ever wanted to – I felt like an Israeli, a little bit guilty if he’s working here. One was a young man, and very intelligent. So, it’s very funny that he, too, were 6, 10 years almost in a concentration camp. We invited him for dinner. You see, it’s not that I can say (inaudible). My personal feeling is much stronger aversion than everyone else has. I can’t listen to the German, even in the television. And I was twice in Germany, after the war. Once was for my money. My husband was in such a very bad condition, my husband was in the hospital again here. (inaudible) And the insurance didn’t pay for it. He came with this sickness to the country, so they’re not paying.
Q: And the second time?
A: The second time I had to – I went to, I had an uncle over there. He was Director of the hospital and he was the leader of one of the prominent Professor, (inaudible) Herbert Levine. And he asked me to come to England...(inaudible – to see) in a prison, they have someone, and they think it is Dr. Mengele. And I saw him so often that I stand before him, probably I could recognize him. And I wanted to arrange something from Israel for myself, so I said, ‘Okay, I’m coming.’ But I had sleepless nights, and I always thought, ‘How can I recognize someone I hardly saw?’ And after that, I didn’t go. I was afraid for myself. I thought that – before I see him, I could say that I can’t decide anything...in me, it’s always, I’m full with hate. I’m not talking about that I’m not complaining, let’s say for, I take life from today. But, everything in me is inside...(inaudible) and for Eichmann there had to be a witness over there, but I didn’t go either. They have other people, so I’m not – I don’t – I can’t talk. And, (inaudible) they had enough people, so - .
Q: Did you speak to your daughter about what you went through when she was growing up?
A: Yes, yes...I talked to her...
Q: What brought you to Jerusalem...
A: That we came to Haifa...my brother lived in Haifa. Then, my husband worked very hard, as I told you and got, - I was very worried about it, and looked for a better job. A job he had not to work physically so hard. So they offered him this job here in the Hadassah...we got it for three years, but I said I never will live with suitcases. I move and then I move again, but I am packing out. So we moved.
Q: ...do you think that America can be relied on as a friend of Israel?
A: ...I’ll tell you, it’s very, - depends who is (inaudible) if they interested political, so they are interested, otherwise, they would sell us as everyone, now selling us, I think.
Q: What about the Arabs...what possible solution can there be to this problem?
A: The solution, to find a solution is a little bit late. I was a fighter for actually giving back everything immediately. Like Moishe Dayan. For, I knew in advance, that we can’t live with another 2 million Arabs. Exactly what happens now...(inaudible) I read a lot about it, and I heard all this. And I know that it’s a different – and I just could, today, you can’t turn back your - .
Q: Clock....
A: And I am very sorry about the situation to tell you the truth. I don’t like to see people suffering on one side, and on the other side, we have to explain that it’s not our fault that the Arabs are living in the camps, after 40 years, no one is ever asking, ‘Why all the people are still living for 40 years in these camps? They are refugees. They kept them. And no one is asking. (inaudible) and America is paying for it. So you still getting the rations, and still living in the camps. They have no money. The Arabs have more money than the whole world – they could give them a human living. They could made it before, and then it wouldn’t come to this stage.
Q: Do you think Israel should give back these territories?
A: Today, it’s very, very hard. I mean, for giving back, I don’t how to make the border. I agreed with the plan from (inaudible)...and they made it with shekel. And they had to make it before all the hatreds inside the country. I mean, today, it’s already – everything burned the Arabs from inside the country...
Q: Do you find that the Israeli’s have become more extreme in their views?
A: Yes. (inaudible) very extreme and very aggressive. I mean, every person, personal even. I must say. It is (inaudible) religion got already a party. I mean, it’s already – not only religion.
Q: They mix religion and politics here.
A: It’s mixed very, very strong. I mean, if you – I am a very good Jew, (inaudible)...like I worked for one year I was in Germany, in Hamburg working like a prisoner. They offered me very often, one fall in love with me, I coils leave my Jewishness very easy. I would never do it, as if I would have to die for it.
Q: When was this? After the War?
A: No. During the war. Yes. I feel very strong, much stronger a Jew, a proud Jew, like probably all these who are going around and these Orthodox, and all these, this is not Jewishness. I mean, this is for me, so strange, a goy, a nice goy, is nearer to me than all these super-religious people who are (inaudible). It is, it is not to hate the Arab, hate the – I don’t know what they want.
Q: What would you say is the basis for your feelings following Jewish Zionism?
A: I can’t explain. I feel Jewish very strong. I mean, I was always very proud that I’m Jewish.
Q: What is that?
A: I can’t explain it why. Probably the education that I knew I’m different. I mean, I had to be more quiet and we made at home, we were not religious at all, but it was Yom Kippur and I’m not eating. And I went to the Beit Knesset. And, for I felt, among, even today, I am in Israel, I never was in a synagogue, but if I am outside, and...(inaudible) in Yom Kippur I went to synagogue, of course, for it disturbs me that everything is going like normal. I feel very strong, even I’m not fussing any more. I can’t.
Q: When you think of Israel as a country, you think that it’s something that belonged to us 2,000 years ago?
A: I don’t know if 2,000 years, but I have the feeling that this what we got belongs to us.
Q: Why?
A: I have the feeling, that even for 2,000 years, where we are sitting now, that we have no right to throw out all the people who are living for a hundred and a hundred of years over there. I mean, you can’t do, and make and throw them out. When they are not doing – they are not better than the others.
Q: But how can we trust them?
A: We can’t trust them any more. We can’t live together any more. From both sides, so extreme, that there is no way.
Q: Could we ever have trusted them?
A: No...
Q: Isn’t there a conflict between what you morally feel should be done, and what is practical?
A: I think what we will have to make a gentleman agreement with, whatever we can do, with the help of America probably.
Q: You’re not dealing with gentlemen.
A: Not with gentlemen’s, but you have to make a border where you know how to keep. I mean, to stay, so many soldiers to keep over there and they are all unhappy to do this job...it’s not a job for our soldiers, what they are doing...
Q: You went to Los Angeles this year...what did you think of America?
A: I went alone (to Los Angeles) my husband stayed in New York...we were there only three days in (Los Angeles?) ...this is an old friend, we were together in the camp, and she...sent me the ticket, and she ask me, she’s 92 years old, I shouldn’t postpone my trip, and to come and see her...
Q: She was in Theresienstadt with you?
A: Yes. Everywhere she were with me. She was very good to my mother, which I never will – forget her, and that I stayed very good friends. (inaudible) but she is much older...we stayed for 5 weeks in Larchmont. From Larchmont, we went to a cousin of mine to Providence...
Q: Did you find Americans superficial?
A: I had no connection now with them...
Q: (Children come in and Hebrew is spoken).
SIDE TWO.
INTERVIEW ENDS.
PAGE
PAGE 13
PAGE
PAGE 13
