National Council of Jewish Women Sarasota-Manatee Section Holocaust Oral History Project Interview with Kurt Marburg
April 16, 1986
Bradenton, Florida This is Fern Niven f or National Council of Jewish Women. I am about to interview Mr. Kurt Marburg who is a resident of Bradenton, Forida. Today is April 16, 1986. Mr. Marburg was born and spent his early years in Germany and he has agreed to descirbe for us his early childhood experiences related to Hitler’s coming to power and the beginning of the Holocaust.
Q: Mr. Marburg, so that we may have a wll-rounded picutre of you, will you tell us about your family, your brothers and sisters and what your parents did for a living, for starters and then we will go on from there.
A: I am the only child of parents who were born and raised in Germany, that is have their cultural backgrounds, education, and businesses in Germany, in Berlin, and although my father and mother were not born in Berlin, they married in Berlin and I was born there, went to school there, and actually stayed there from my date of birth until immigration in 1938 in Berlin.
Q: Did you go to a public school or a Jewish school?
A: I went to a public school initially, until approximately 1935, or was it 1936, I am not quite sure. At that point the German government decided that Jewish children could not be educated under the German school system, and therefore, the local and regional school congregations set up schools, private schools, which were supported by the congregation and the congregants to admit children and be taught by the Jewish teachers and only participate in their activities.
Q: Were your family religious?
A: My parents were conservative Jews. My grandparents were religious—not orthodox, but religious. Both on mother’s and father’s side were religious.
Q: Did you have some additional religious instructions, like when you were Barmitzvah?
A: Yes, I was Barmitzvah. I received Barmitzvah instruction and was Barmitzvah on the exact date that I was supposed to be scheduled according to the Jewish calendar, on July 31, 1937, in a Temple that was burnt down at the Crystal Night in Berlin.
Q: At that point you were exactly 13 years old?
A: I was exactly 13 years old.
Q: Did you belong to any Jewish youth groups?
A: Jewish youth groups. Yes, I did. There were some sports clubs. Yes, I participated in particularly well, in what you call it--running, jumping, I forgot the name of what it was called. Ah, ah, Field, yes, field sports and swimmimg sports. Yes, I participated.
Q: Was it a Zionist-oriented group?
A: I would say ‘yes’. It had strong Zionist identification, yes.
Q: Before these special schools were set up, before the Germans forbade you to attend the regular schools, were you subjected to anti-Semitism by your fellow schoolmates?
A: I would have to say ‘no’, and I was a little bit surprised when my parents approached me and said as of next year you will no longer attend public school, you will now attend a private, well, a parochial school. It came to me not as a shock, but as a surprise.
Q: So you didn’t really experience ant-Semitism on a daily basis?
A: Not in the school in Berlin. I did experience it under other circumstances. But not actually with the classmates of that age-group in the school itself.
Q: Can you describe some of the other circumstances?
A: Yes. The other circumstances were social and were, let’s say recreational. When my pasrents decided on weekends to go to the suburbs of Berlin for outings and so forth, certain places were inaccessible, inaccessible in a sense that signs had been erected that Jews were not desirable in this restaurant, in this park, in this, let’s say whatever recreational activity they were not desired. Or in some cases it said ‘not desirable’, in other instances it said ‘forbidden to participate’.
Q: What was your emotional reaction?
A: There was a bit—as a child I would say there was confusuion, more than anything else, because I couldn’t understand why I, or the family, or friends with the family, could not go in there, and we were excluded. It was confusing, at the outset.
Q: When Hitler came into power, did your parents talk about this particularly, do you remember that?
A: Yes. There was talk, of course I would now have to put it in a time-frame and I was all of—well not even ten years old. That was in 1933. We saw the street brawls in Berlin and soon after the 30th of January 1933, the official date of the take-over of the party, and of course a month later the burning of the Reichstag in Berlin, gave the, what would you say, gave the impetus and the unquestionable power structure of the party in everyday life in Berlin. The uniform of the SA and the SS, not the soldiers who always wore uniforms, of course made their presence known in germs of noise and crying slogans of anti-Semitism, they carried banners of anti-Semitism, defacing—not so much at the outset—but as time progressed—the impact of the isolation of the Jewish community in Berlin became evermore, let’s say, strong and intensified.
Q: It must have been frightening.
A; Yes, it was. In the latter part of the years, of my stay, in the latter part of 1937 and 1938 I faced at times not only in Berlin, but also in the outlying cities, and in other cities in the state of Hessen where my father comes from, which is the Frankfurt area, let’s say anti-Semitic expressions and as children I would see physical attacks on the street primarily, not so much in public places, but let’s say—walking on the street we were subject to verbal and physical attack.
Q: Did you wear some sort of identification so that they would know you were Jewish?
A: No, not at that time, no, we did not. The only identification, that was the last thing before we could leave, the only identification we had to have before we passed the border patrols was that my father and mother had the letter ‘J’ printed on the German passport which I indicated to the passport examiners at the borders that Jews were leaving the country.
Q: So if you were attacked on the street it was basically by people who knew…
A: People who knew us to be Jews, that is correct. But no physical identification.
Q: You used the terms before, SA and SS, would you please clarify this for people who would be listening to these tapes, what the initials stand for and what the different functions were of those two groups?
A: The SA were the brown shirts. I am not quite sure what the A stands for, the SS were the German initials for the Schutz Staffel, which was an elite group of dedicated Nazi sympathisers who were trained for and later used for serious attacks on Jewish property, population, and structures.
Q: As the anti-Semitism accelerated, how did your parents regard this? I should word this a little differently, so many people said they didn’t really think anything was going to happen…
A: That is correct. My father, his father, and his grandfather, and I recently have made a study of my ancestry, I really haven’t uncovered the roots of my family since I carry the name of a German city about 80 miles north of Frankfurt—did come from the state of Hessen, and my father’s uncle served in World War 1, was killed, was a battle casualty in one attack in France, his grave is in France, the memorial tablets are still in the small town, even today, I saw it there two years ago, inscribed, was not removed by the Nazis, and my father, a veteran of World War 1 with the military honor of the Iron Cross, also wounded in attacks in Belgium, never had the perception, the feeling, or the well, what might you say…the idea that even though a dictatorial party had taken control of Germany, that this would be, that the end result of that party was actually the total annihilation or destruction of the Jews. It was not conceived, it was not perceived, it was not realized at all. So there was a feeling of false security. I am now talking about the years 1933 to perhaps 1937 for sure. But after that it became evident and my father had second thoughts. And even though the history and the background of the family—that something had to be undertaken to eventually liquidate the business and try to find a life elsewhere, when it became more and more restrictive.
Q: How did that come about?
A: I don’t know that exactly but the only way in looking back is that discussions with my uncles, other family members, my mother with my grandparents, related to certain economic restrictions taking over and confiscating Jewish assets which may be, which gave my father and other family members the feeling of a more urgent need to make arrangements to save what could possibly be saved and immigrate.
Q: How did your father go about this?
A: My father had two uncles, yes, two uncles, brothers of his mother, who had immigrated in the early, I am sorry—in the late parts of the 19th century, 1890, 1888, who thought at that time that they would find, let’s say, a fortune in the United States and became citizens of the United States and settled in California, became very comfortable, one had a wholesale bakery—well, that was not in California, that was in Spokane, Washington, and the other one had a liquor distributorship in San Jose, California. These people were approached who had actually very little contact with my father because in 1888 my father wasn’t even born yet and they had already left the country. They were approached to pledge an affidavit of support, they had to guarantee the U.S. government that immigrants, whether from Europe or any other country would become no burden to the state and that these people would vouch for a certain amount of money that they had to verify as far as assets were concerned to the State Department who in turn, then as a result of that commitment, contacted us in Berlin that two affidavits of support had been registered.
Q: So really, you mentioned grandparents, did your grandparents remain there or did they want to immigrate too?
A: My grandfather on my father’s side died in 1936. My grandmother on father’s side she, yes, she intended to immigrate. My grandmother on mother’s side decided not to leave. She was advanced in age and decided whatever the circumstances were not to leave, and she remained and she passed away in Berlin and is buried in a cemetary in Berlin which I was able to, some time ago, been able to visit and that grave still stands, was not destroyed, even though the cemetary had been bombed, Jews had been hiding there from the Nazi street hordes, etc., but the grave is intact.
Q: I had asked you earlier what business was your father in?
A: My father was the Berlin branch office manager of a real estate and building management firm with the headquarters being in Munich. His uncle established the firm in Munich and when my father was discharged in 1920 from the army he then relocated to Berlin and took over the branch office of that business and remained in that capacity until he left in 1938.
Q: Can you remember and describe the actual leave taking?
A: Yes, I can describe that to you. First of all, when the affidavit of support was issued, the State Department, the local Consul General and his staff was charged with the responsibility of even though the financial part of the immigration as far as the U.S. government was concerned was settled, certain economic, political, social, medical, psychological—well, I would say that covers a multitude of sins—of probes, investigations, certifications by the U.S. government, the office of the Consul General insisted that certain proof of economic stability, political stability, social responsibility, health and medical histories met certain rigid direct specifications so that even though the U.S. government had no financial responsibility any more, these various area were checked, double checked, proof had to be submitted which took time, which took money to obtain, and based on those papers they either approved immigration or didn’t. so it wasn’t just a financial matter. It was also other areas. In other words, even though we were—and it was quite clear to the U.S. government that—I am speaking for my family—that we were forced, politically forced to leave our homes, it was a rather difficult process to satisfy these requirements and actually implement an immigration.
Q: How long would you say what period of time elapsed from the time your father started this process until you were actually approved to leave?
A: Twelve, twelve…I would say every bit of 18 months.
Q: A long time under those circumstances.
A: Under those circumstances an eternity.
Q: Were you allowed to take your furniture, were you allowed to take money?
A: Eh, yes. We were allowed to take our furniture. Money was another matter. The German government required that based on the tax records that my father had submitted, just like the U.S. tax structure, you pay your taxes according to your income, so it was quite evident from what my father had earned, bank accounts and so forth, and other assets, a percentage was slapped on these assets to be turned over to the German government as a, well, as a final legal appropriation of assets that was still held by Jews who were honest enough to show them on their records, and that was called—well, if it is important I can tell you that type of tax…
Q: No only if you can remember it.
A: It is the Reichsfluchtsteuer, it was a federal tax levied on people who emigrated. The name of that was the particular tax I just mentioned.
Q: And when you left Germany you went by train to a port?
A: By train. We took a train from Berlin, a through train from Berlin to Rotterdam. My father had purchased tickets on the Holland-America line, which meant that our baggage was restricted, there was some, I remember it, some irregularities at the border and it became almost a, well, a very close decision by one of the border officials to deny passage, but for some reason my father—I did not know, I do not know now what the difficulty was or how to explain it, but we were held up and it was not five seconds that we were on the train and the train had moved had we not made that train we would have been—I suppose—arrested at the border for some trumped up charge.
Q: It sounds like a nerve-wracking experience.
A: It sounds, it was a nerve wracking experience in the sense, that yes, when the last border-control took place on the German-Dutch border it became touch and go whether they would finally put the stamp unto the visa.
Q: Had your furniture been shipped separately?
A: The furniture was shipped separately. It was packed in a container and there was no problem, it went to Hamburg, it was loaded on a freighter and we got it, I don’t know, I think about a month later after we had arrived in New York.
Q: When you got into the Netherlands, were there problems after that?
A: No, once we left the, once we crossed the border there were no problems at all. I would say we considered ourselves safe at that point.
Q: Before we started taping you stated that five days after you left there was a particular significance.
A: That is correct. I remember landing here on November 4th, and I also remember it was the first Tuesday in November. The first Tuesday in November in the U.S. is election day. That sort of struck me kind of funny, landing on election day.
Q: Did you know that at the time?
A: Yes, because—I did know it at the time and the part of course—we knew that President Roosevelt was up for a second term and all that and the free election was sort of an acronysm that we didn’t have from 1933 to 1938, and it was sort of ironical that we who didn’t have free elections arrived on election day in the U.S. On the 9th of November, and that is another ironic date, because on the 9th of November 1923 was the first attempt by Hitler in Munich to make an impact as a political party in 1923. One of his cronies, Horst Wessel who composed the song that became the second National anthem of Germany, was killed in that Putsch but it was the first attempt—he had written “Mein Kampf’ already and certainly if the free world had read “Mein Kampf’ and pout two and two together in 1923 when his party moved on downtown Munich from the Burgerbrantkeller and met the soldiers and police and a gun battle erupted, but had they recognized what he stood for and what he wanted to do, it was an open book. He told the world what he was going to do. “Mein Kampf” is still available you can read it in the library of Congress, but no one took him seriously and I see analogies today in today’s political structure where we just explain things away, where the liberal approach to things is just, let’s say, as soft, and let’s say as given the benefit of the doubt and you can see where history can repeat itself, whether the name is Hitler, or by the name Kadafi, or Duvalier or Marcos, they all come and have the same goals, and it is hard to understand for someone who went through the beginning of the Holocaust that the world 40 years later still is a babe in the woods and doesn’t recognize our present dictators for what they really are and what they want to do,
Q: We are slow to learn.
A: We are very slow to learn and very slow to retaliate and I would say, and I believe this wholeheartedly. If the world in 1923, the free world, had recognized what took place on the 9th of November 1923 on which an attempt was made, and took proper action to combat this “terrorism” because that is what it really was, local, small terrorism. But no, they let it grow they let it fester and nothing was done to eliminate it, to fight it. Yes, on the 9th of November 1938 the anniversary date of his first Nazi party attempt, a Jewish refugee, I believe, or a French citizen, I am not sure now, attacked the secretary of the German embassy in Paris, and killed him, gunned him down. I do not recall why he was gunned down but he was gunned down in Paris which was at that time, well, one of the major embassies in Paris. This assassination of the German secretary in the Paris embassy was the trigger, was the fuse that lit the Crystal Night in Germany, meaning that the synagogues, I would say with the exception of maybe one to five perecent that were not touched for some reason, were torched, stores were looted. Jews were thrown out of their homes, arrested, thrown into concentration camps never to be heard from again and, let’s say, it really was the platform from which the destruction, the ultimate destruction started. I was fortunate enough to hear it on the radio here, we did not have TV in those days.
Q: So in November 1938 when you arrived in New York you were how old?
A: I was just about 14.
Q: And you remember what you thought and felt when you came into the Harbor and saw the Statue of Liberty, saw the big buildings, went into the city?
A: Yes. There was again, I would have to say the feeling of breathing free. That sort of immediately came to the surface, we were received and met by some relatives who had left years ago.
Q: Not the people from California?
A: No, they did not come. People, other relatives who had left in 1934 and 1935. And I suppose the ability to see no slogans, to hear and feel and being told that now you are really free and safe gave a feeling of relaxation. A feeling of let’s say elation so to speak, and to feel that we really escaped, that we really got away, that we were able to take along what we could take along, even though certain assets we couldn’t take, but we were happy to have that whatever we could take along.
Q: Were you able to remain in contact with your grandparents?
A: Yes, we were able to stay in contact and we wrote letters to my grandmother and other members of the family who had no relatives and were not able to secure any commitments of affidavits of support from the U.S. for whatever reason, and subsequently the mail stopped, obviously as deportation took place. Yes, butfrom 1938 until 1941, beginning of 1942 we were still able to write and then the mail stopped.
Q: Did you remain in New York City?
A: Yes, I did remain in New York City.
Q: And your father, too?
A; Father, family, we all remained in New York City, went to school in New York City, that is to high school, upon graduation from high school I was drafted into military service, served with the U.S. Army in Europe, fighting the Germans, saw action in Belgium in 1944.
Q: Were you really old enough?
A: Yes, upon graduation from school—I was not a citizen of the country but was required to register and was drafted even though I was not a citizen of the U.S. I was in Europe when the war ended. Yes I was in a town near Frankfurt and I was a G.I.
Q: Did you become aware of the concentration camps at that point, did you know about them?
A: May I make now a point, but go back on that point a little in time. I explained that to my wife and I often question the naivety of the German interrogators and the denazification program when the question was raised “Did you know or were you aware or did you realize what was going on?” The answer was ‘no, we didn’t know what was going on, we never heard, no, that was all kept from us.’ In 1935, it was in 1935, because I remember in 1936 I was in Berlin and I saw the Jesse Owens humiliation of Hitler when he won the three events in the Olympics and this was the day when he made those records and Hitler turned his back and walked out of the stadium. So this incident I was referring to was in 1935, it was in a small town, in Fulda in the state of Hessen where my grandparents had a kitchen furniture factory and it was the practice that I would spend the summer vacation between the semesters with my grandparents and my father and mother would go to the seashore by themselves and on the way back would pick me up. This one day I rode my bicycle and rode the bicycle as I usually did not in the street but on the sidewalk and had I made the turn to go to my grandparent’s home I ran into a local Nazi SA official. He was in full uniform and he came down and I couldn’t get off the sidewalk and I ran into him and almost knocked him over. He sort of got his composure and looked at me and said, and these were his exact words, he said to me. “You Jewboy if you do this again I am going to see to it that they put you in a concentration camp/’ Now this is 1935, this was not an idle threat, I don’t think, but what I want to say is that the concept of these camps existed that early and certainly was aware by these small-party officials. Now if he didn’t know what he was and just used the word, I wouldn’t buy that. He knew what it was, he knew what went on there and he threatened me with it. Of course it never came about, he just said it, but that indicated to me that these people knew what the party actually did establish to force the partyline on the German population and the political opposition.
Q: You said when the war ended you were near Frankfurt. What concentration camps were near Frankfurt?
A: No concentration camp near Frankfurt. The only one that I saw as a G.I, I didn’t liberate it, it was not near Frankfurt. Yes, there is one but isn’t really near, there is one in Weimar, Buchenwald, but that is quite a distance, that is about 120 miles. I would say there is none around Frankfurt. But I did see Dachau about May 8 was the liberation and I saw it in July by which time some clean up had taken place. The stench was still there. I mean clean up meaning that the corpses had been removed but it was obvious what went on. The ovens were there, the huts, the shelters, the punishing and torture chambers and all of this, the execution wall, the lime pits, and also the guard headquarters. It never came under small arms or bombardment, it was left intact. Yes. That is another thing which is a little enigmatic. I think the military before D-Day, before June 6, 1944 knew about some of these concentration camps yet no attempt was made in bombing runs to eliminate them. Let’s say at least make it difficult for the Germans to operate them.
Q: You brought it up. I was going to ask you in the light of history, Franklin Roosevelt was considered a great hero in those days but subsequently we have much evidence to prove that he and Churchill could have saved probably millions of lives if they had bombed rail lines or the camps or the nearby cities and what was your reaction when that became evident?
A; That’s right. I don’t remember too many details about that because I was a little too young to really grasp the political implication.
Q: Well I don’t think we knew it then, we’ve only come to know it in the last twenty years or so as history has unfolded.
A: I would say also that certain people who came here as immigrants had been survivors as early as 1938/39 had been already unmates of concentration camps but for some reason were able to be released. They knew where they were. They had specific knowledge—exact knowledge where they were from these people if they wanted to know. Yes, they did know the exact locations of certain camps.
Q: How long did you remain in Europe after the war ended?
A: Another year.
Q: Gow did the Germans in Frankfurt react to the ending of the war?
A: I was at that time the detail to an M.P. battalion in Frankfurt which, among other things, was responsible for the escort service of General Eisenhower from Bad Homburg where he had his residential quarters to the I.G. Farben building in Frankfurt and it was our battalion’s responsibility to provide the escort of his G.I. Cadillac which was driven by Kay Summersby, who was a very attractive woman, and I will leave it at that, we had very little difficulty with the Germans as far as problems to control them, as far as violating curfews, as far as let’s say opposing the occupation. I might say they were as meek as lambs and easily controlled and it was actually child’s play to be on patrol in the city or on the roads. Our problem with the D.Ps—no offense intended—who had been incarcerated for this length of time felt the freedom and let their celebrating and their feeling of freedom actually get out of hand and attacked physically the Germans and us for not letting them do what they felt should be done. So the D.Ps in the camps who were waiting repatriation such as the Russians, the French, etc., gave actually more problems than the German population did. It was an easy occupational task.
Q: What kind of problems did the D.Ps give you?
A: The D.Ps felt that they should not be restricted in camps, that they should be removed from these camps, live in housing where the Germans lived, they wanted complete freedom, go and come as they wanted in the camps, that was not allowed, they were restricted to stay in the camps, certain hours of leisure was granted, but they felt that wasn’t enough. They also felt that I suppose the curfews, the occupational forces imposed on the Germans were too liberal, let them get away with murder, so to speak, quite literally, and that probably I would say was their contention.
Q: By the end of the year that you remained there, had most of them been repatriated?
A: Yes, yes. Repatriation took place quickly. Russian liasion officers had during the summer of 1945 meetings with Ike. I remember riding escort for them to Ike’s headquarters and they made sure that their people, the Russians, made sure that they would be repatriated and not let them get away. Yes. That took place rather quickly. So did the French and the Poles.
Q: Were these D.Ps these displaced persons, mostly Jews or also other religions?
A: I would say they were—no I don’t think they were Jews. They were of other religious denominations predominately. May some, very few Jews.
Q: So that in about 1945 you came back to this country?
A: In 1946.
Q: And what about rebuilding your life?
A: Yes. 1946. I came back in 1946 and at that time there was a call out in summer of 1946, I had just been discharged, for a specialist who was fluent in German and fluent in English to follow up on criminals who had escaped German denazification boards and incomplete denazification records. This was called the Civil Censorship Division which was set up in New York and then moved into the occupation zone which at that time—there was no Bundesrepublic as it exists now, there were French, American, and English zones, and each zone had its civil censorship division which tried through the mails and through the telephone to trace and apprehend escaped war criminals. I signed a contract for three years, but after the second year the work became so repetitive that I just didn’t want to stay.
Q: How old were you by then?
A: I was 20, 22, let’s say, 23 years old. I took a position with the post exchange service in Munich because at that time they were replacing the military that ran the post exchanges with civilian personnel, and through some connection I got to meet somebody who was instrumental in the hiring process and he offered me a position and I stayed another two years in Munich as a civilian employee of the U.S. government administration of the post exchange service.
Q: You told me earlier that you had a career in industrial relations.
A: I just mentioned that I was on the administrative end in P.Ex and snack bar system of the European exchange service. I was exposed to personnel administration at that time. It actually was my first job or position, whatever you might like to call it as a discharged soldier, because after I got out of high school I went into the service. So I was put in a personnel administrative position and stayed in it for two years, liked it and felt that when I would come back under the G.I. bill of the U.S. I would get my education to make a career of human resources in personnel administration, which I did and from 1953 when I graduated school, the state university of New York until 1978 full time, and now part-time, worked in industrial relations, personnel administration and personnel management.
Q: Were you allowed to become a citizen while you were in the service?
A: That is right. I finished my basic training in December of 1943. There was a group ceremony of all non-citizen G.Is who had expressed—we were not formally asked whether we wanted to become U.S. citizens—in my case there was no question. However the actual certificate was conditional that if we did not get an honorable discharge there would be no issuance of the citizenship paper, the honorable discharge was paramount to becoming a U.S. citizen.
Q: You speak remarkably good English with virtually no accent, whatever accent there is is a New York accent. Did you learn English in school in Germany?
A; Yes, I did. I learned actually two languages. Actually three, I have to say three. I was enrolled in the parochial school, Ivrit was taught as a language. Hebre, Ivrit was taught as a language. We did not receive Zionist instructions, indoctrination or anything like that, but Hebrew was taught. Of course we had German literature and we were also taught English and French. So I would say actually as a 12, or 13 year old I was learning 4 languages, my mother tongue and three others.
Q: Where did you meet your wife? I noticed that she has an accent.
A: My wife. I met my wife in September 1947 in Munich, Germany. At that time I called her, what was the Bing Crosby song—I called her my Million Dollar Baby from the Five and Ten Cent store. Really she worked behind the candy counter at the Munich man P. Ex and I was a civilian employee and the first casual meeting was as a civilian buying my candy ration from her at the store, and from that casual meeting and since she worked there I would go and get my ration—and I guess a relationship developed in Munich. I left in 1950 and my wife immigrated. Even though I had more than a casual relationship with my wife at that point I did not get married until I graduated from school and she had arrived as a Germaqn immigrant under the quota system. Again, with an affidavit of support that friends offered and as an independent immigrant coming to the U.S. When I found employment after I graduated from school we got married.
Q: Do you have a family?
Q: Well, you have certainly given us a good picture. You are actually the first one I’ve interviewed who has gone back to Germany. You have given us a different perspective on the war. You were younger and escaped and then went back as an adult. We are grateful to you for sharing your experiences with us. This concludes that part of our interview and what the Germans were to the Jews. You want to say a little of what it was like to go back to Germany as a German but as a G.I.?
A: Yes; when it became clear to me that the unit I was training with, and of which I became a permanent part, was designated to go to the European theater of operation in September of 1944, I had a feeling of perhaps, that I may have a chance, you might say, of evening the score. If I came face to face with a given situation it would be my decision what to do with whomever I met up with. It gave me a feeling that there is a balancing out of injustices—let’s say—it gives you a chance of evening the score, there is a God-given gift of evening the score.
Q: Did the question ever come up regarding your reliability or dependability in a combat situation?
A: There was never any conflict in my mind and my military superiors, let’s say, never doubted my reliability or dependability in a combat situation.
Q: That really must have given you a great sense of satisfaction.
A: Yes, it did. Let’s say a feeling of being able to do something in this world to stop this madness of let’s say, world domination of dictatorial power.
Q: That, too must have given you a great feeling of satisfaction.
A: Yes, it did. But in retrospect I must say that it crossed my mind that if I would be captured and they would know or find out my background, I would probably be in a precarious position as a POW. I dealt with it in my mind but really didn’t solve it.
Q: I would think so.
A: Right. I thought of that. But I would say now, in retrospect, being 20 years old at that time, you don’t give a good G.D. and you would make sure it would never come to that. I was aware of it but had no answer for it.
Q: In that case it was a matter of that the good guys won.
A: Yes, the good guys won. The only face-to-face combat situation that I partook in was the Basttle of the Bulge which erupted on December 16, 1944 at the complete surprise of the Allies and caused unknown casualties, massacres and shooting of innocent POWs. It almost succeeded in separating the American troops from the British and driving a wedge through to the coast of Belgium. But General Patton relieved the embattled Bastogne troops with his famous ‘NUTS’—NUTS quotation and who would not surrender to the German military commander of the spearhead of the German resistance. This attack brought this sphere of action to a halt, thanks to “Blood and Guts” General Patton who really put an end at that point to the German resistance.
Q: Is there anything I haven’t asked you that you would like to add at this point?
A: Yes. In retrospect, had the Free World, not only the U.S. but other countries, who, let’s say, were certainly able to absorb politically persecuted people, who were running for their lives, by easing up on certain immigration policies or requirements—to enable those people who had no relatives in the U.S.—or whatever the requirements of other nations might be, to give them a chance to immigrate or give them a free haven or to just rather turn their backs on them and let them succumb to the “Final Solution” they eventually had to suffer.
Q: By their attitude they became a party to it.
A: Yes, I would agree with you – I would safely say by their atitiude they became a party to it.
Q: That’s an embittering thought of idea.
A: Yes, it is – yes it is……. .
Q: Thank you again very, very much. It has been a very interesting interview.
PAGE
PAGE 15
PAGE
PAGE 15
