United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Hiltgunt Margret Zassenhaus
May 26, 1994
RG-50.030*0265 PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a taped interview with Hiltgunt Margret Zassenhaus, conducted on May 26, 1994 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
HILTGUNT MARGRET ZASSENHAUS
May 26, 1994
Q: Can you give us your name, and where you were born and when?
A: Yes. I'm H. Margaret Zassenhaus. And the "H" is an old German name, Hiltgunt. Almost too difficult. That is why I shortened off. And I was born in Germany, in Hamburg, quite a few years ago as you can guess.
Q: What year? Can you give it to me?
A: (laughter) Do I have to say this? Yes, I was born in 1916. That means really during world war number one. And I will tell you my father was a rather known educator in Hamburg. I had a mother who was just a mother but a mother who I remember as probably the best mother ever could be because she really would over and over encourage us, have the courage to form your own opinion. This is what I remember when I think of my parents. I had three brothers. My oldest brother, Hans, was a professor, became a professor in mathematics was he in Princeton and in America. And my second brother, Guntra (ph) is a physician as I and he lives in California. And then I had a third brother, who was also a physician. He was killed in the war, in Germany.
Q: And what was his name?
A: That was Vilfreet (ph), which means in English will peace. And he was the one who was killed in the war. So, we lived in Hamburg. As soon as the Nazi's came, my father was . . . Three SS (ph) men came into his office and took him by the arm and led him out. He was the head of a very fine school in Hamburg where he really taught the liberal ideas and the classical ideas of and how people should live with each other. So, we were very grateful to a point that at that point he already had Parkinson's disease. So they, for the time being, did not arrest him because he was a rather known man in Hamburg. He had written several books about the history of literature, and so they tried to go light about it. So, I can only say almost fortunately soon after the Nazis came, he died, because his fate otherwise would have been to be in one of the prisons. I had three brothers. My eldest brother, my oldest brother, Hans, he was a professor in mathematics. And later as I came to America where he was both in Princeton and in other universities. And my second brother, was physician as I, and lives in California. Then I have a third brother, Vilfreet (ph) was his name, but really means to will peace. But he was the one who was killed in the war.
Q: What was it like as children together in your household? How do you remember it?
A: Well, one of my most wonderful memories are those days. And one of my saddest memories is that day when Hitler finally came to power. We didn't have televisions, but we had the radios. And everywhere, even in the streets, they blared out the Hitler music. And I remember very well my father. He assembled us that same night in 1933. And he said, "Look now, you see what has happened. And I want you to know that in our home, nothing will change. We will have the same values. We believe the same thing. We will be the same as we always are." But, he said, "We've got to be extremely careful now because we are known." My father was a very known educator in Hamburg. And he said, "You must learn to be quiet, not to shout 'Heil Hitler', but to be quiet on the outside because this is the only hope we can survive this." And true enough, the next morning several of his SS (ph) men came to our house early in the morning. They wish to come early so that they knew you were there. They asked for my father. But my father at that time already had a rather advanced case of Parkinson's disease, which really was a blessing because they couldn't transport him and they would have had all kinds of things to get him out there. And since my father was a rather known man, a rather known educator in Germany, they were a little bit afraid to begin this, to rock the boat too much. So, they left him alone. And I can almost say since and very soon afterwards, he died. So, he was spared. But the very same day after that happened, that the Nazis came to our house, I remember too well my father got us all togetherus four children and a mother. And he said, "Now you see what has happened, what is happening. But in our home everything will be the same. On the contrary, for now on we will be much more together than we ever been before. And I urge you not to be afraid." I remember that today. "Don't be afraid." We were afraid. Because known as my parents were in that community, we were really very much a target of being arrested. And the only reason that my father was not arrested because they came . . . At that time he was already so far advanced in his disease that they just let him alone and said, "Well, he's dying anyway. He's gone." So, that was the beginning. And I will tell you from there on, we really were about the closest knit family you ever have seen or ever have experienced. Because we lived in our own home. We had our values as we always had. We could be open with each other. And very soon we got a tiny little radio. You see, many, many years ago, you didn't have all these wonderful television and radios. You got a tiny little radio. We never were very interested in radio, but for now on we always start to turn. Do you know what we were looking for? Finally, one day we found it. The radio from London. That was . . .
Q: From London?
A: From London, yes. We lived in Hamburg. From London. Finally we got a voice from freedom. And from there on really morning, noon and night, whenever we had a spare minute, we listened to that radio which gave us the truth. I never forget that because it was almost an obsession. Don't ask me for television because we didn't have it at that time. We had only very tiny little radio. So, it was not all terrible grief because somehow this brought us together. And our Jewish friendsand we had quite a few Jewish friendswe'd gather together. Not anymore in the daytime. We came to them in the dark, after night. Or they came to us in the dark of the night. And very soon, of course, things got very dangerous. I mean, Hitler was very smart. He had a way of finding the elite and try to decapitate them. It's an old system of any dictator. If you do that, of course, the rest will go. And, so, the arrest came at night. And I must tell you that my father not only was a very known educator, but he had also written the books about the literature (ph) and was really known all over Germany. And the Nazis knew that he was quite ill already, so they let him be. But I remember one day an SS (ph) man coming to us and he said, "Just remember you better be very quiet because you are observed." And that we felt very much. But now, none of us has ever been arrested. So, we were very fortunate that way. And now, so, it was very difficult so far because what they did indirectly they tried to harm us. We didn't have too much money. To study in Germany was very expensive. This was really a question of having money. And what they did is they simply cut out all the assistance, which otherwise gifted children and people who didn't have all the means to study, all this was cut away from us. Because they said, "Well, you are not Nazi. You're not in the Party. If you show us good will, we will help us." And that good will did not come forth. So, from there on really our house was more or less like a beehive. From morning to nightand that started about in '34we had children from all kind of schools whom we tutored. And this really could get the money for our daily living. Because the very same day when Hitler came to power, three SR (ph) men came through the house of my father and was to the officethe office schooland said "this is it", and led him out. It was a tremendous fortune that they didn't arrest him. We understood why they didn't do it. My father was a very known educator all over Germany because he had written quite a number of books. And to begin this, they went rather lightly on it, of the very prominent people.
