-TITLE- YAEL DANIELI -I_DATE- APRIL 9, 1991 -SOURCE- ONE GENERATION AFTER, BOSTON
-RESTRICTIONS-
-SOUND_QUALITY- POOR
-IMAGE_QUALITY- FAIR
-DURATION-
-LANGUAGES- ENGLISH
-KEY_SEGMENT-
-GEOGRAPHIC_NAME-
-PERSONAL_NAME-
-CORPORATE_NAME-
-KEY_WORDS-
-NOTES-
-CONTENTS- Dr. Yael Danieli Director and Co-founder Group Project for Holocaust Survivors and Their Children est.1975 Lecture to Boston's One Generation After group in 1985 1:8:32 In the early 70's my interest shifted, being a PhD candidate, from mental illness to mental health. Part of what I said to myself was that before we talk about mental health, we have to learn what it means to be alive and we have to want to survive.
1:9:11 I asked what makes people want to stay around to begin with and what occurred to me at the time was that it was hope. I brought that idea for a doctorate to my advisor and he got quite excited about it too. I set out to study what I sought to understand as the
psychology of hope.
1:9:58 At the time I was teaching at Brooklyn College and all of my students got nuts with me. We tried to encompass everything, that is, any challenge to hope- starting from missing the subway or failing a course to losing your job, getting divorced or becoming
physically handicapped.
1:11:00 I sought the extremes and the extremes at the time, being the late 60's and early 70's, were unusually troubled. I also got into serious work with the terminally ill and their families.
At the time, everybody, every poor student of mine got into the act and it made them quite happy, even though we were researching very sad things, hopeless things.
1:11:53 We were asking the whole range of questions from total hopelessness, or what seemed to be, to total hopefulness, what does it mean. Well, that led me to a range of interesting and exciting findings and yet one of them kept working at me- every survivor I spoke to felt quite isolated and strange and had negative reactions to other people. What kept striking me over and over was that every survivor ended up saying that nobody had ever talked to me or nobody has ever believed me when I tried to talk about the war.
1:13:17 I kept hearing tales that nobody wanted to listen and nobody could possibly understand, even the mental health professionals who they had sought in therapy. Here I was, a growing mental health professional, hearing all of this about my fellow colleagues. It didn't look like they had lived up to their job, which was to listen and to understand and I was getting
progressively indignant.
1:14:05 I interviewed survivors at their homes. They told the same tales- nobody wanted to hear about this, if they mentioned it to their friends, they were thought of as freaks. People said the same things: "this is America now...put away the past...you're being
morbid."
1:14:46 At the time it seemed like the only real way to go was to get people together in groups, because if survivors feel that no one understands them and that no one will listen, the logical step would be to bring survivors together. They wouldn't feel mistrust and isolation in a group. I also figured that it would help mental health professionals because if they are not listening or if they could not understand, there would be survivors there who would. It seemed like a good idea.
1:16:17 I had a personal struggle at the time deciding whether to work with cancer patients or survivors. However, being a very proud Jew, I decided to work with my people at the center for this type of study, in Brooklyn. I asked for a list of every mental health professional who had ever called the center, with the logic that anyone who had ever called would naturally have some interest.
1:16:58 I called each one and asked them if they would be interested in volunteering. The idea behind volunteering was that no one had ever been trained in this field, no school or program of study had prepared people to work with survivors of the Nazi Holocaust and their children. I figured that since the survivors were going to provide the training, it would be like bartering. It seemed fair and all things seemed right.
1:17:50 We started in about '71 or '72. We got the groups and it was quite an incredible experience because the kind of togetherness that we experienced was unheard of at the time. It was really wonderful and people kept talking about having a family again. That is essentially what we were building, an extended family and a
sense of family.
1:19:45 Survivors say that now they can finally talk and understand each other. We started with survivors and the notion of course led to the name, Group Project. I know how sensitive survivors are to being called sick or insane, so there was no way we were going to attach ourselves to an institution.
1:21:13 You all know what sensitivity is when we talk about it.
There are many feelings here that lead to sensitivity. One is the history of euthanasia in Germany. It of course didn't start with the final solution of the Jewish problem. It began at the very beginning of Nazi Germany, even before the War began, with the gassing of imperfect Germans, the mentally retarded etc.
1:21:50 Later on, after '42 when the final solution came about, if someone was sick, thus incapable of work, he was gassed or killed.
Being sick therefore was certain death. Many survivors feel that it is a posthumous victory for Hitler that if they feel that they aren't healthy and can't raise children who are physically healthy- they cannot survive. Every child thus became a symbol of happiness and hope and of the future. All of that got into the idea of bringing new life into the earth.
1:24:26 We saw these survivors not as sick but as people who had adapted miraculously to situations never encountered; isolation, hunger, distress, betrayal. We figured that after the War, the term "getting back to normal" didn't apply. There was no longer anything normal-no home, no family, no community. Instead of trying to get people back to normal, we tried to find out what they meant by normal. We learned a lot.
2:00:20 I study different families. One type is a family of fighters. When I say fighters I don't mean fighting ensured survival. What I mean to say is these people chose to feel like fighters after the War probably to counteract the feeling of the victimized Jew. Families of fighters knew that they had to be strong and couldn't be weak.
2:3:18 The children of these families also felt the need to be fighters. They told me stories of how they would go to marches and demonstrations and yell at the cops. In their relationships they couldn't be soft and tender.
2:3:18 The most tragic kind of family is the numb family who are survivors who usually lost both their parents and their children.
In these families, the parents still behave as if they were in total shock, no feelings are allowed at all-no bad feelings and no excitement either. The children in these families are tragic, they are left to fantasy and imagination-they are left alone and neglected. They are afraid to succeed and have never been given guidance or been taught. Because their parents don't understand success, it is hard for their children to understand it.
2:6:40 Another kind of family is "those who've made it". These are usually the ones who've made it American style. Even though I talk about families whose marriages are mostly bickering or marriages of disparity, rarely do survivors divorce, they don't destroy families like that. Those who've made it are usually younger, they were too young after the War to immediately marry. Their motivation was to beat the Nazis, however they could-study, be famous, be rich, etc.
These are the people, who, when they came to America, took out the numbers. They were not going to let anybody know that they went through the Holocaust. If they married survivors, they tended to divorce and marry non-survivors, thus denying by saying, "I don't belong to these people". They assimilated into American society.
2:8:50 Something gets lost here. Because what becomes important is what is displayed. What matters is to succeed, relationships get lost. Children of these families only get noticed when they succeed. These children usually find out about their heritage not in the home, but from a stranger and this creates pain.
2:12:15 I want to make a drawing. The very middle is "I" with the next circle as family. Concentric circles continue with the next ones being community, religion, nation, international... Ideally, people have a life which is free flowing and they move from the past to the present to the future through these realms. When victimization occurs, there is a rupture in the circles. The more areas it hits and the earlier it hits, one's ability to succeed is reduced. It is harder then to move into the future remaining fixed in the present. When fixity occurs, therapy, getting people together, creating a family and a community is a necessity. As long as you are stuck, options are not there. Therefore, hope is not there. As much as you feel better,you cannot get better. To get better takes a lot of work, to escape the fixture and not be stuck.
2:19:09 The meaning of getting better is to explore, to see beyond.
Getting better says that I can really become aware of who I am and what disrupted me. Then it is possible to again gain a sense of continuity and start the free flow. I was born and I grew, no matter what the Nazis did to me or how I had to act to adapt.
2:26:25 When survivors are finally able to mourn and let go of their guilt, they are transformed. They can fall in love, succeed in relationships, stand up and say "I am alive and I like myself'.
That takes a lot of time and very hard work.
2:28:14 I want to talk about survivors' guilt. Guilt is a very powerful obstacle to living. Originally survivors' guilt was a feeling of why was I spared? Carmeli(ph) tried to transform this and she believed that if all these survivors had survived, there must be a reason for it. She separated what she said was passive guilt-"I was spared the fate of others"-and active guilt which occurs legitimately when we compromise our sense of values or when we don't do something that we should do. This was a helpful
distinction.
2:31:59 Guilt is the most powerful defense against the sense of existential helplessness. Guilt creates a lie, it wasn't that I was helpless, I could've done something, I just didn't. This implies that you had the options and the power to exercise a choice and you
choose not to.
2:32:38 This is an invention to defend the hopelessness of the situation, actually there was nothing you could do. Every child of a survivor, out of great love, wants to undo the Holocaust, both for their parents and for themselves. They want to have a community of love and trust and to have opportunities that were taken away.
There is so much love in survivors families, but a big part of it is a love that says "I wish I could". Children of survivors like to try to play God and take the bad away. This creates acute guilt and a feeling of helplessness, there is nothing they can do to save the Jews from the Holocaust. This helplessness is very painful.
2:36:28 One function of guilt is plain loyalty. The feeling of wishing people were there. A survivor believes that he is alone and therefore wishes old family members alive. This keeps the dead with them and is a kind of loyalty. Part of this loyalty says then, that to be loyal is to be sad and to suffer. It is a living commemoration of the dead, but since these people didn't have graves, their relatives often walk around as tombs.
2:40:02 You may ask yourself would it have been better to have died, this is not to deny the pain. An ironic function of guilt is that the murderers do not feel it. The victims are feeling the guilt. But this guilt is a sign of morality in a world that is seemingly immoral. This is warped but it is right.
2:42:45 Survivors age prematurely and die prematurely, usually from cancer. There is a chronic sadness with survivors, but also a sense of hope and a joy and an appreciation for life. The Nazis deprived the Jews of the natural process of growing, aging and dying. Normal aging does not exist for a survivor. He encounters the same situations, but feels them deeper. Retirement is very difficult because of the notion that salvation and life only come through life. When people retire, they have more time to think and they review their life. In the case of survivors, as they age and review, they are attacked by memories. Their bodies are not as strong and they get sick.
2:47:03 Being sick is a problem for survivors. Their families feel unable to put them into old age homes. Know that there is a special need for these aging survivors. Bring them in, take care of them.
You will get a sense of doing something really good for people who need it. Thank you.
. END.
