Key: SS - Dr. Sonja Samson [interviewee] NL - Nora Levin [interviewer] BL - Barbara Lerner [third person] Interview Date - June 3, 1985 Tape 1, side 1:
NL: Dr. Samson, I want to again thank you very much for coming this long distance from Princeton in order to make your story part of our Oral History Archive. Let's start, if we may, by asking if you could tell us a little about your beginnings, your background, place of birth, something about your family, where you were born.
SS: Okay. Let's begin with my name. I am named Sonja. I am named after my maternal grandmother, who died before I was born, and in the Jewish tradition, a child should be named after the deceased closest kin. Her name was Susanna, and my mother did not like that name at all. Now, how do we get to the name Sonja? My grandparents, on both sides, Samson, and my mother's maiden name, Hoffman, all were born and raised in a town in the northeastern part of Germany close to the ocean and adjacent to the Dutch border. The name of the town is Aurich, A-U-R-I-C-H. I met a cousin in the early 50's, the only time I went to Israel, whose name was, like my father's, Joseph Samson, and he said he had traced the family genealogy to the Samsons having originated in Italy, and moved northward in the 16th Century. And part of the family ended up in Holland, part of the family in Germany. This cousin, Joseph Samson, who would be a man my father's age, they were first cousins, his branch of the family ended up in Holland, and my family in Germany. My maternal grandfather, Aaron Hoffman, was also called Adolf Hoffman, went into an apprenticeship, as was common in those days, to learn to be a salesman. You know that they apprenticed for years. So, during the course of his apprenticeship, he met his wife, my grandmother, maternal. Her name was Hilda Loew, L-O-E-W. She came from a southern part of Germany. They married and they established themselves in the Saar, which is adjacent to France, the French border. They were very successful, both of them starting from zero, and took advantage, I guess, of the fact that this was coal mines, that's what the Saar was about, and ended up with a substantial department store, probably one of the largest in the region, in a town named Dillingen, the capital of Saar is Saarbrücken, and Dillingen is not far from there. They did so well that by American dollars, by American standards--and I can go back into documenting how I know this to be a fact--but apparently they were millionaires.
NL: First generation...
SS: First generation. Right. Accordingly, my mother, Carla Hoffman, was born in Dillingen, and so was her brother, who was three years older than her. His name was Ludwig, or Louis. Now, since the rest of the family, that is my maternal grandfather, Aaron Hoffman, came from Aurich, he had some five or six siblings who were all in Aurich. Thus, there was a lot of traveling up and back between Aurich and Dillingen. Thus, I assume that my mother knew my father from childhood on. My father's family, the Samsons, were quite wealthy, quite well-to-do in a profession that is not thought of commonly as being a Jewish profession, but they were cattle-raisers. They raised cattle and sold cattle--Viehhändler. Do you speak German?
NL: I read it. I read it. I understand some of it.
SS: So the Samsons, also, I think they are my paternal grandfather, Rubin Samson, has something like five brothers, all raised in Aurich. When my mother married my father in 1929, I think--I was born in 1931, they settled in Aurich.
NL: And you were born there?
SS: And I was born in Aurich. Now back to the name--I lost it! So, I was to be named Susanna after my father's mother who had died. My mother did not like the name. 1931, the 30's, was the height of the flourishing of Communism, especially in the Saar, among miners...
NL: Interesting.
SS: ...and my mother, being a rebellious lady, chose the name Sonja, which was a popular...
NL: But despite her upper middle class...
SS: Right! Right!
NL: ...rank, she had sympathy for the workers, the proletariat...?
SS: Right, right. And neither parents, my father nor my mother, ever called me Sonja, except when somebody was angry, then it was "Zonyal".
NL: What did they call you?
SS: Sonie. Sonie.
NL: Sonie. Ah, that's nice.
SS: So that was the only name that I really responded to. Sonja was always...
NL: When you were being scolded?
SS: Right, right.
NL: And what was their life like in the 30's? Was there a lot of labor discontent?
SS: Well, I wouldn't know. My, uh
NL: From what you heard?
SS: Let's go back to Dillingen then. My mother and her brother were said to be raised as spoiled brats. He was said to have been a playboy, and the reason that that has been for me personally, problematic, is that, on the one hand, no one close in family survived. I'm really the only survivor, with the exception of one cousin, first cousin, Samson, and his sister, who have followed the pattern. And that is, the pattern has been, any time I ever wanted to talk to any distant relative in the United States, or this first cousin, whatever they have to say is totally colored by still ongoing envy, resentment and jealousy. It's unbelievable, it's unbelievable. So that it's always been relatives of my parents' generation, that is, their first cousins, you know, the other side, and whatever, and there's still, "Oh, we remember Aurich and the parties" and all that. But in fact, I promptly gave up asking them anything because, well, at the time, it was disturbing. As I look upon it now, I'm keenly aware of the fact that their profound jealousy, resentment, in spite of the fact that these people, my parents, they were in camps, they were slaughtered in Aurich, I mean in Auschwitz, and all the rest. None of that seems to have erased the intensity of their envy.
NL: Incredible.
SS: Yeah! This includes, by the way, my cousin Henry Samson, who is my first cousin, as I said. He survived in Belgium, with his sister. When I first moved to New Jersey, I contacted him, and all I got was in fact, in these photo albums there are photos of his sister, him and I as children, and the amazing thing about the photos--I look happy in the pictures, but they look surly. And he starts out with, "Oh, I remember when we went to visit you at your house in Aurich, how it was a big deal for all of us, you know, going to see Sonja and her family, and it was so wealthy, so opulent." And they just--in fact, they themselves, were quite well off.
NL: But you were a notch higher?
SS: I'm sorry?
NL: You were a notch higher?
SS: Oh, G-d knows, I was an only child and all that.
NL: But, I mean, the image of this wealth...
SS: Yes, yes. So, I decided, the hell with all these people. At some level, there had been some fantasy on my part about this cousin who lived in Edison, New Jersey, that it would be nice...
NL: Of course.
SS: But I'm not willing go put up with that kind of...
NL: Break down all of those old...
SS: Yeah, and to hell with it, to hell with it.
NL: Do you have any memories of your life in Aurich as a child, so up to six...
SS: Yeah, I do. I do. More than that, I think for a terribly long time, I had an incredibly reliable, clear, uncluttered memory for events, which I've lost. And part of the reason, I think, was that I had made a very deliberate and conscious attempt to remember dates, places and so on, because until 1946 or '47, I always thought I would see my parents again, and it was important for me to fill in for them everything that had happened to me, where I had been, and what I had done. So my memory is sketchy, but, nonetheless, I think at some level, it's relatively sharp. About my mother, I remember vividly her stories of World War I. I don't know if you want to go into that.
NL: Yes. If you don't mind.
SS: Not at all.
NL: She told these to you when you were a young child?
SS: Yes, yes.
NL: She suffered much?
SS: No. My mother, I think, in part, one of the reasons for the family's intense dislike of her, I mean, that they couldn't overcome it, aside from the kind of, you know, sociological perspective, one notch higher. I think, in fact, she was a very interesting lady. She was an exceptional woman in the sense that, well, she went to school in Lausanne, so she spoke French fluently. It's been put down as having been a finishing school, but you know, a school by any other name was a school. She once broke her arm during World War I, she remembers that--remembered that--and was in a rehabilitation center in which they, because the arm was stiff, they put it in some kind of machinery, you know, that bent the arm backwards and forwards. And there were all these miners with their injuries, and she said that she cut the fan belt that activated the machine, and the whole thing stopped, and everybody was delighted. Now, whether that in fact was true or not--how the hell do I know? But, it says something about what kind of person she was, or pictured herself. She told stories about how they used to play war, how buildings would come tumbling down. She remembered, she said, being gassed, you know, gas was being used, and said in case that ever happens, just urinate in your underwear and hold it in front of your nose--and breathe through it!
NL: Did it work?
SS: Apparently, apparently! But I've never forgotten that, you know?
NL: Quite a trick! Amazing. Probably an old wives' tale that worked.
SS: Possibly. There seems to be some notion that maybe it does. Anyway, she fought, as I do, the perennial battle of the bulge, that is gaining excessive amounts of weight, and dieting, and that is also quite apparent in the photos. You know, expansion and contraction. And I seem to have the identical problem. My father was an exceedingly handsome man. Again, the photos show that. A very bright man, a very brave man, and a man of character, and his motto was, "Un homme sa parole", which means, A man, his word. And, that's how he died.
NL: You heard that? You heard that phrase?
SS: Yes, yes. And he lived that, and he died that.
NL: You had a happy childhood, I take it.
SS: Extremely.
NL: Although you were alone, you had playmates, of course.
SS: No, but you know, that's an American meshugas, when you need playmates.
NL: Oh, sorry.
SS: Or when you need toys, or anything like that.
NL: How did you amuse yourself?
SS: You want to go back to Aurich...
NL: Just a bit.
SS: And I, sometimes, you know, the stories that one recalls best about oneself, have a way, just like my mother's story, of saying something about the person, and I think at some level, I haven't changed, or there's a part of me that's still that. In Aurich, where we had a house--it was a big house--because I did go there after the war. It was then occupied, by, I don't know, five or six families lived in that house.
NL: Huge.
SS: Yeah. And, you know, we had maids, and in Dillingen, I remember the chauffeur and his children, and the neighbors, and so on. But anyway, we lived--the house in Aurich was am Hafen, which means, I can't think of the word. It was on the riverbank.
NL: Am Hafen...
SS: Am--by Hafen means port, or bank, riverbank. And I remember one of my earliest memories was when I was about four years old. We left Aurich, I think, in 1936 or '37. I left in '36, so I was five years old, and joined my grandparents when I moved to Luxembourg. I lived with them for one year. My parents moved to northern France. But anyway, so whatever recall I have of Aurich has to be before the age of five.
NL: Yes.
SS: One story: This river which was in front of the house--well, there was the house, a road and the river, and that river always had logs transported, whatever, and that was forbidden. You couldn't go down, step down onto the river on the logs. Well, I did.
NL: You did.
SS: With the neighbor boys, and I fell in and I got soaking wet and I went home, and when I got home, I was first greeted by the maid, who asked me what had I done, and it was clear. She spanked me and put me to bed. My mother came home and asked, "Where's Sonie?" and the maid told her. My mother came upstairs, spanked me, and said, "Don't do that again." And when my father came home, late in the evening, he did the same story. So that was the only time I could remember three spankings.
NL: Three spankings How did you amuse yourself? Do you remember if you looked at picture books?
SS: I re--well, in part, there are lots of photos, you know, sometimes it happens that when you look at photos, they cloud one's memory, and it becomes fixed to a photo in part.
NL: I see what you mean.
SS: So there is the, you know, a sandbox, and stuff like that. I remember my mother, I think, loved to travel. She was a rather cosmopolitan lady and Aurich was kind of a dull dump and a hole, and so I recall frequently being on trains with her, visiting up and back. In fact, at times when I had the urge, or thought I should write a kind of autobiography, I was going to call it "Trains." There's so much good and bad, horrible and soothing in my life...
NL: In Germany, mostly? Or across the borders?
SS: Both. The across-the-border story with my mother was--and that I have a pictorial recall. We were crossing the border, my mother had smuggled something.
NL: This was already by '36, '37?
SS: No, no, this was also still before, after...
NL: You getting tired? You want to stop?
SS: No, no, no, no. Whatever she smuggled, I don't remember--whether it was French liqueur or French--God knows what, but at the appropriate time when the inspector came, I recall lying on the bank, on a, you know, the thing you lie down on in the train. It's interesting when I think back, German, French and English sort of--English is not the language that...
NL: That you remember.
SS: That I remember it in.
NL: You don't remember it in--you think of it in French or German.
SS: Well, as a friend once pointed out to me, in German I tell the truth, in French...
NL: You elaborate?
SS: No. In French, I lie, and in English, I intellectualize.
NL: Oh my, that' a quite profound statement.
SS: It is, because when I try--there are times that I sort of get external and out of touch, and if I want to get a sense of what am I really feeling, I try to think in German.
NL: Still that powerful pulse of the language?
SS: Right. But it's like layers, you know, like an onion. So anyway, on that train, I remember being awakened by the customs inspectors, as is--was customary--whenever you crossed the border, and just as he was looking through the luggage, I just vomited all over the place, and he ran off. This was one of my mother's favorite stories about me!
NL: Oh, my, that's marvelous.
SS: The other early story was in Dillingen, in my grandparents' department store--no, it wasn't in the store. I don't know, we were someplace, somewhere, in some town, some city. We were in a fancy restaurant, and the story that my mother told, and that a cousin who currently lives in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, confirmed, was that as I came back to the dinner table, I yelled with my most exuberant self, "Mutti, Mutti, ich habe einen grossen Haufen geschissen." Which means, "Mother, Mother, I shit a pile!" [laughter]
NL: That's a marvelous story!
SS: So you want to know about playmates and stuff like that...
NL: Well, that's the American bias. I guess...
SS: Well, it is an obnoxious kind of a bias, because we instilled in the kids that happiness is other kids to play with. And, you know, I didn't and...
NL: You were happy...
SS: ...and that wasn't part of my world, and when I was with kids, mostly it involved being in mischief, mostly for the reason of not being visible as a Jew. If there was something nasty to be done, which--it was a good cover up, and I was very deliberate and very conscious about doing that.
NL: Then...
SS: I can tell a lot of stories about that.
NL: Was there, then, a sense that you were not wanted there as Jews?
SS: No. I'm referring mostly later.
NL: Oh, later. But how about during this period up to the time that you moved away to Luxembourg? Were your parents involved in the so-called Jewish community at all? Did they go to shul?
SS: Well, you know, all the stuff that's been written about German Jews being so assimilated and all that, my family on both sides were very interesting. On the one hand, they were utterly assimilated. My father was a very successful businessman, got along extremely well with his customers, the peasants. They trusted him, both in Germany and in France, where he really worked for a very short period of time. They trusted him. He was sort of like his own veterinarian. He never needed the recourse of a veterinarian, and at the same time, they were Orthodox Jews.
NL: Is that so?
SS: Oh, yes.
NL: How many Jews do you suppose were in Aurich? A handful? Several hundred?
SS: It was a substantial Jewish community. It had a substantial shul, and just about in Milwaukee, in Chicago, in various places, there are a lot of Aurich Jews, and they flock together.
NL: Is that so?
SS: In fact, both in Chicago and in Milwaukee, two cousins who were brothers, Hoffmans, established their own synagogue to recreate...
NL: The German.
SS: The German...
NL: ...model.
SS: Right. So, I'm terrible about estimating numbers, but I would say a number of sufficient to found their own synagogue.
NL: And did you go to shul with your parents? Do you remember going?
SS: Oh, yeah. In Aurich, no so much. Well, yeah, I remember in Dillingen, where my grandparents were. I remember in Luxembourg. Again, about my mother--my father was Orthodox, didn't wear a beard, he didn't wear peyes [side curls], but he laid the tefillin [phylacteries].
NL: Did he? That's interesting. Totally assimilated man...
SS: And totally kosher.
NL: German.
SS: I mean, I remember a story onetime when he came home because he traveled during the day and came home late at night, so I knew him relatively less well than I know my mother. I remember him coming home and being really sick to his stomach, and what had happened is he had eaten at some peasants. And I don't know how it happened, because he was very cautious. He thought he had eaten pork, and he just spent the rest of the day vomiting.
NL: So you were raised very much in a Jewish religious tradition?
SS: Well, a crazy one, because of my mother. This crazy lady had five sets of dishes--milchig, fleischig, milchig and fleischig for Pesach, and trayf [dairy, meat, not kosher]. And whenever my father was away, she would ceremoniously pull out the trayf dishes. And we'd have trayf.
NL: Wonderful.
SS: But, she never contaminated the dishes. We always had two kitchen tables, two sinks, two everything.
NL: Two kitchen tables--that I've never heard of.
SS: Two sets of towels?
NL: Two sets of--two tables? Extraordinary.
SS: Yes.
NL: Do you remember any Eastern European Jews in the town?
SS: No, no.
NL: This is probably a little too far west for them, I would think they might...
SS: Right, right.
NL: Poland or Russia?
SS: No. And you know, as I mentioned, in Milwaukee and in Chicago, there is this whole colony of people from Aurich that I would have nothing to do with. I really don't like these people at all.
NL: Sometimes this syndrome is associated with a certain smugness, but obviously this wasn't true of your family.
SS: Ah, petty, greedy...
NL: ...provincial...
SS: The reason that my accent is as bastardly as it is, when I came to the United States in 1947, I was 16 years old. I came by myself to join these relatives, and, I had forgotten German, because it was important during the War in France that I do, but at home these people only spoke German, and when I spoke English, they corrected me with their German accent. So I came to Milwaukee to learn English!
NL: You were under many different contradictory influences.
SS: Yes. I came to Milwaukee to learn English, but instead, I had to learn German.
NL: Your English is fine.
SS: Thank you.
NL: Did you go to school in Aurich?
SS: No. I was under five. But, an interesting thing when I lived with my grandparents okay. In 1935 or 1936--I think, it was '35, there was the plebiscite, the Saar plebiscite, was it, do you know if...?
NL: '35.
SS: '35. Since my grandparents were from the Saar and yesterday when I looked through some of these documents for you, there was mention of that, too--apparently, my parents, during those years and even though they lived in Aurich, assumed or operated under a Saar citizenship. And since they opted--so during the plebiscite, as you well know--it meant that the Saar population could vote with it to become French or German, and, for all I know, the results were rigged in favor of Germany.
NL: Overwhelmingly.
SS: Overwhelmingly. Anyway, as people who had voted for France, they were given the option to leave, and it is under these conditions that they left, and I think that explains also, why the year.
NL: Excuse me. Why did they prefer France? Can you tell me that? Do you know that?
SS: I don't, except that...
NL: Well, Hitler was already in power.
SS: Hitler was in power. I have one memory of--well, my mother, by virtue of her Swiss schooling and Swiss--in the French Swiss-spoke French fluently, and so would have been Francophile...
NL: Oh, so they were obviously afraid of...
SS: They were afraid.
Tape 1, side 2:
SS: The one memory that I do have of Hitler was walking down the streets of Aurich with my mother. I might say that when I went back to Aurich in 1953, and I'll explain later my purpose for going, which was monetary, in my head Aurich was a small Dorf [village], you know, a little speck on the map! In fact, I was awed--it's a big city. It's a city.
NL: Of course it has grown.
SS: It has grown, but still...
NL: Do you remember it as a tiny place?
SS: Oh, yeah. In part, because, also, one of the early stories was an aunt who lived toward the center of Aurich, marketplace, and we lived, I guess, where the river was, more the outskirts of town. Whenever I didn't like things at home, that is, with my mother, I would just take off and cross town and go to my aunt's. All by myself!
NL: You were an independent child!
SS: Oh, yes, I was very independent.
NL: That's so much in conflict with the norms of that German-Jewish upper class, upper-middle class culture. Little girls just didn't do those things.
SS: Well, you know...
NL: ...did they?
SS: I have a feeling that this country's head is full of mushy stereotypes, which in fact, may or may not apply.
NL: But--you were unusual, weren't you? A girl of your age...
SS: I had an unusual mother.
NL: But most Jewish mothers weren't like your mother in Aurich.
SS: Right, right.
NL: So, you broke out...
SS: You asked me about toys--I remember the earliest toy that I remember. There were dolls, and as photos will attest to, I didn't like dolls. And there are pictures of me with dolls. Maybe you can find--I didn't like them. She gave me an erector set, and I loved it.
NL: That's interesting. I didn't like dolls either.
SS: But anyway, so the earliest early memory was walking down the streets of Aurich, the shopping center, with my mother, when all of a sudden there were all kinds of sounds, noises, and this was, I guess, Hitler coming through town with his entourage, and I remember my mother just pulling me and running into a store. And, again, unlike American brats today, one didn't say, "Why do I have to go with you, Mommy?" You just did it. You felt it, You did it. Maybe that's a difference. Children did not challenge...
NL: ...authority.
SS: ...the adults. That's...
NL: Can you tell us now why Mother and Dad, Mother and Father, separated from you in '35 or '36, and why you went to Luxembourg while they went to France?
SS: I--you know, at the time, 1936, I was five years old, so I was not privy to...
NL: Can you re-
SS: No, all I remember was that it was happy to be with my grandparents in Ettelbruck and my assumption--Ettelbruck is in Luxembourg--and my assumption would be that they wanted the time to resettle and get their affairs and everything in order. But, again, it was a happy time.
NL: It was a happy time?
SS: Sure. I was the first grandchild, much adored. I remember, you know, you asked about other kids. I always wore silk clothes, and always had something which I have thought since as being very neat--the underwear matched the dress. So that when the boys would flip up the dress, you know, it was all matching.
NL: Oh, that was real elegance.
SS: Right. And because my recollection of myself was that I was sort of, not a very neat little girl, whenever I got dirty, they changed my clothes and got me angeputzt [dressed up].
NL: In an ensemble? And where did Mother and Father go? What city of France?
SS: They didn't go to a city. They moved into a village by the name of Rocquigny, R-O-C-Q-U-I-G-N-Y, which is in the Ardennes.
NL: And Father planned to re-establish his business there, or...?
SS: Yes, he did. They bought a house and he had cattle and did the same thing he did in Germany. And judging by letters that I have, documents, which appear to be character references, apparently he did well, was highly respected and liked. And unlike her, he didn't know French and learned it. In fact, someplace I found a little book that he used to study French for vocabulary. So my stay with my grandparents was a happy one.
NL: And how long did you stay with them?
SS: I would imagine, I think it was about a year. But, you know, my parents would come and go and visit. The interesting thing is, again, keeping in mind that my grandfather was an Orthodox man. I remember him saying, and I remember going to shul with them in Ettelbruck, being very condescending of Jews who used organ music in shul, and he said, "When people listen to music, they don't pray." So he was against it.
NL: And you remembered that?
SS: Oh, yeah. To this day, I don't feel comfortable in a Reformed shul–at all. In fact, if anything, I would characterize myself as an Orthodox atheist.
NL: Oh! I wasn't prepared for that!
SS: I'm both. If I relate to anything Jewish, then the feelings are Orthodox tradition, and so on. Okay. Anyway, my one--I have many memories of Ettelbruck–but one I remember in particular was being in a religious Catholic, run by nuns, school. And I remember that--it must have been at Christmastime, because there was the créche, you know, with the little porcelain Holy Family, and where the big treat was for every child to be able to hold the little Jesus--and I think I dropped it.
NL: And it broke?
SS: But...
NL: Were you punished?
SS: No...
NL: Or reprimanded?
SS: Not really. But it was understood that children are clumsy, or something like that, and you shouldn't do it, and I felt bad.
NL: Were there other Jewish children in the school?
SS: I don't know. I don't remember. That's the only...
NL: You don't remember feeling conspicuous as a Jewish child, especially?
SS: As a child, as I said, I was well-fed, well-nourished, well taken care of. I never felt deprived.
NL: But in the school setting?
SS: No, I didn't. But it occurred to me as an adult, reflecting upon that, apparently my grandfather foresaw something, or a lot, and that that was part of a kind of training he wanted me to have--to know how to get along with goyim [non-Jews].
NL: Aha! Or was it their adaptation?
SS: No, I don't think so. Remember, the man was an Orthodox Jewish man.
NL: He couldn't very well conceal his beard.
SS: He didn't wear a beard.
NL: He didn't wear a beard.
SS: None of them wore beards. Okay, to give you a sense of that--my grandfather died of illness in 1938. It was some kind of cancer, skin, excruciatingly painful, and, again, it's the same story all over again. I have one of the cousins who imported me, facilitated my coming to the United States, in Chicago, was a physician. And the same story--I couldn't get any meaningful information about my family. Now, I understand that what he died of was a kind of condition that is rare but predominantly found among Jews. And I mentioned that to a friend who's a dermatologist once, who could name it...
NL: And there is that pattern?
SS: There is that, and I forget what it was. Anyway, so he died of illness in 1938. He was transported from Luxembourg to a hospital in Strasbourg in France. That's also where he's buried. And my mother apparently had promised him that she would never smoke on Shabbes. And my mother, like I, or I, like my mother, was a chain smoker, and I never knew her to smoke on Shabbes or Yom Kippur, even after he died. You know, what I'm saying about this sense of...
NL: Yes, yes. Very strong sense of uh...
SS: Commitment...
NL: The appropriateness of these values.
SS: A commitment.
NL: A commitment. Yeah. Past death.
SS: Yeah.
NL: In Luxembourg itself, through the 30's--well, you were there only a year...
SS: One year.
NL: And you were a very little girl. You don't have any sense, either, as a result of your experiences at the time or what you learned about the situation later, were there any rumbling of neo-Nazism or Nazism...?
SS: I don't know.
NL: Were Jews suffering in Luxembourg?
SS: I know that my grandparents were absolutely, as you noticed on the photos, you know, they look upon me as the adored child. They were extremely proud of the fact that I learned to speak the Luxembourg, which is a Plattdeutsch [Low German], fluently.
NL: I see. You picked it up in that year?
SS: Yeah. And you know, this delighted them.
NL: There were apparently no ominous signs during that year--political signs.
SS: I'm sure there were. I'm sure that there were. I mean, I remember, that image is mostly in France, listening to the radio, I'm hearing Hitler blasting out in the familiar dog bark. Yes, I think that one sensed it, that it was there, but obviously at age five or six, I had no way, really, I don't think, of conceptualizing it.
NL: And so, after a year, Mother and Father then took you with them? Is that what happened?
SS: Yeah. Then I came to France, and I didn't know a damn word of French, so...
NL: You had to learn it.
SS: ...at age seven, I guess, I learned French.
NL: Best time in the world to learn a language, isn't it?
SS: Yes.
NL: You picked it up quickly, I'm sure. And what were some of your impressions of the French school? You were enrolled in a school, I suppose. Was that a difficult adjustment for you?
SS: It was difficult because by the time I got there, they were doing fractions that I didn't know. I didn't know how to do fractions. It was difficult because of the way the French do divisions, for example, is different from the way they do divisions in Germany. So it was difficult for my parents to help me, that kind of thing. But, then, that was good training. That became a way of life, because during the ten years that I lived in France, I once counted having attended something--I don't remember--I told you once--how many schools.
BL: Fourteen.
SS: For the ten years I lived in 14 different places, and I don't know, I was in school, I wasn't in school, you know.
NL: For how long a time were things relatively equable for your family?
SS: In France? Well, 1939, my father volunteered into the French army, so he left.
NL: Excuse me--as far as you know, out of some feeling of identification with the anti-Nazi cause?
SS: Yes.
NL: And/or a way of achieving French citizenship, or had he already acquired that?
SS: Oh, no! Come on! You know very well that you could be in France for 582 years and never attain French citizenship.
NL: But I thought service in the army accelerated that process. Anyhow, it's not relevant here at all.
SS: Maybe. No, I think more--for a long, long time, I was--I succumbed to the Bruno Bettelheims, and the Hannah Arendt notion of Jews being led to the slaughter like sheep, you know? And I really felt angry at some level, or anguish about my parents not having come to America when they had the money, about not having gone into hiding when they could have or should have. And yet, as I alone struggled through this, I returned back to: "But, who are these people, my parents?" That's what I said--"Un homme sa parole"--and I remember my father saying, "Why should I hide? God knows I am an honest man. Honest men do not hide." I mean, there was this kind of--at some point, I must judge it, and I put it down as a kind of naive, blind, you know, religion kind of thing. In fact, I was wrong. I was profoundly wrong. This man had principles. This man, at age 39, not knowing the language, joined the French army. He was ready for combat. Now, you want to play Tweedlededee or Tweedlededum: Did he do it to save the family, to get citizenship, whatever? He enrolled in the army in war.
NL: He believed in what he was doing.
SS: Obviously. Obviously.
NL: And the Bettelheims and the Hannah Arendts, I think, are doing an ex post facto sort of judgment. This is how I interpret it.
SS: Well, I don't like Bettelheim at all. I mean...
NL: But, your father obviously didn't want to change his whole system of values simply because the world was changing or seemed to have been changing.
SS: Isn't that the hallmark of a genuine Orthodox Jew?
NL: And this eternality of values, you see, he was committed to that.
SS: Right. But, I mean, you know, there was a story that you know better, maybe I read it in your book, about on Yom Kippur, how the Jews--it was the atheist Jews in Auschwitz who refused to eat.
NL: Yes. So Father enlisted. What was their life like let's say in '38 after Munich? Have you recapitulated that?
SS: Well, we lived in Rocquigny, in this Dorf. I remember traveling up and back to visit my grandparents in Luxembourg. My mother's brother married a Belgian lady, and they lived in Belgium.
NL: Did you sense any greater anxiety in your parents as the decade drew on? You were very young, of course, but do you recall any anxiety on their part--'38?
SS: You know, I don't know how to describe that. Let me try to formulate it. No, no. Let me try to describe that. I didn't mean to pass over. Among the very vivid memories, I mean so vivid, I can feel it, I can see it, was, I was three times in concentration camps with my parents, twice in Gurs, once in Rivesaltes. On each occasion, I can clearly see all or most of the other people about crying and sobbing and whatever. I have no recall, not a single one, of my parents behaving that way. I remember my mother organizing, carrying the big containers of food with somebody else, and whatever little pieces of solid there were in this soup, this slop, were at the bottom, and my mother organizing that whatever comes out of the bottom goes to the children first. The rest could be distributed among the adults.
NL: She was taking charge.
SS: Yes. So that--truly, how can I answer your question? I don't know that I can. I think that I do have some letters that my mother wrote to my father. They're written in German and I can't read German that well, but which do describe, I think, some of her struggles with trying to get monies or whatever.
NL: But in the pre-war period, you don't remember any growing anxiety about the place? I'm just trying, I'm groping for some understanding of why your father enlisted before France was involved.
SS: It was involved in '39. He enlisted in 1939.
NL: Yes, but France wasn't occupied, until 1940.
SS: Until what?
NL: Until 1940. Maybe it was the attack on Poland.
SS: Maybe.
NL: Because there was a technical alliance between England and France to support the viability of Poland. Maybe it was that. Well, it's not that important. Where did he go when he enlisted? Where was he taken to? Do you know?
SS: We looked at these documents last night, and it wouldn't be in here. Anyway, some camps--I had forgotten that--I had quite forgotten that--but he ended up in some camp, Saint-Just, in the departement de Oise, and from there, he was sent to Gurs.
NL: From the army?
