United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Andre Zalc, Lucie Ragin, and Joyce Mizrachi
July 23, 2009
RG-50.030*0535 PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a recorded interview with Andre Zalc, Lucie Ragin, and Joyce Mizrachi, conducted by Peggy Frankston on July 23, 2009 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview took place in New York, NY and is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
ANDRE ZALC, LUCIE RAGIN, JOYCE MIZRACHI
July 23, 2009
Question: This is the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum interview, conducted by Peggy Frankston, with Andre, Lucie and Joyce, who were born Zalc. All brother – a brother and two sisters, and it’s going to be – and it’s on July 23rd, 2009, in New York City, and it’s a continuation of the three separate interviews that were just done, talking about wartime experiences, and perhaps some of the experiences after the war, or some experiences before the war. So, I’d like to start with some of the things that you know about your parents.
A: Yeah, so, my mother, she came from a family living in – in Latvia, and – not in Riga, she was Ventspila(ph). That’s a different city, it’s a ha-harbor in Latvia. And she had two brothers, and t-two sisters. And they owned a – a farm of cattle, a cattle farm up there. But – and of course in Latvia there was a – a certain amount of Jewish population. And that way Latvia also was a – belonged to Russia, but before it belonged to Russia, was a part of Germany, was a colony of Germany. And the people spoke German, and later they learned Russian from the Russian occupation, or beca – the Russian got the – got the territory. And she – her – they were selling cattle to Finland and Sweden and everywhere. But then the – the tsar of Russia had a brother and his name was Peter. And when they went – they went in war with Germany, a – a [indecipherable] there were – he – he was afraid of the Jewish population because in those days the Jews were friendly with the Germans, and they spoke Yiddish, which is an – an old German. It’s a dialect of Germany from – from 500 years ago. So Peter decided, with his brother, the tsar of Russia, they decided to – to take the Jews and send them to the other part of Russia by the I-Iranian border, by the Caspian Sea, by Azrahan(ph), by Baku, Azrahan(ph). And they were sent there. And up there they – they started a new life, with different businesses to survive. And the gr – the grandfather, my mother’s father started because there – up there is a lot of fish. The – the caviar comes from there, and the – and the best fish. And the oils from the whales, too, which was like, very important in those days. So he start the factory of smoking fish, and he was very successful with that because in those days, in the first World War, the Russian army had no C-rations like today, and they used to u-use a piece of smoked fish and a piece of bread. That was the food of the Russian soldier. And – and he couldn’t produce enough smoked fish for the government, so we’re – the government wanted they should produce more fish, they’re working day and night. So he complained about it. So they told him, don’t worry about it, if you’re short of labor, we give you workers. So they gave him Turkish prisoners and German prisoners and Austrian prisoners from the first World War, and they used to work in the factory helping to smoke the fish. And – and two prisoners fell in love with my aunts, and they married my aunts, and when the revolution of Russia started, the war with the Germans and Russians stopped, because the Germans made the Russian revolution, I don’t know if you know that, yeah. Because they got Lenin in Switzerland, and they gave him money and they send him back to Russia to make the revolution. And when they made the revolution, the war stopped. So those – those two prisoners took their wives with them to Germany, and then went to United States. And one uncle – an aunt went to Belgium. And my mother, she was young and she wasn’t married, so she stayed with – with her folks, and the two brothers went to the Russian army. And after the war, my mother was the only daughter home with the – with the two brothers. They went back to Latvia from Azrahan(ph). But the parents died in Azrahan(ph). They got – what’s that disease? The fever –
L: Typhoid?
A: Huh?
L: Typhoid?
A: Typhoid. They got typhoid, and they died from that disease. Typhus, that’s called, and a – typhoid, yeah, in English. So they died from that disease, so my mother became an orphan. So the Russians go – the Russian government gave a visa, as was already after the revolution, b-because she was an orphan, they gave a visa to go to her sister’s. One lived in the States and one lived in Belgium. So she went to Belgium to go to the States, and by going to Belgium, she stayed by that other sister and she married my father. And that’s – that’s the wa – we were born in Belgium from that wedding, and –
L: And we had –
A: – my sister Joyce was born in France during the wartime, yeah.
Q: Where was your father from?
