WELLA SCHIFFMAN Phoenix ',7i ~PRIVATE I came from Prozen in Poland, my father died when I was five years old. My mother died just before the Germans came in. My family name wasSheretz. My father was in the eggs, butter, cheese business. Non Jews brought ehe food in and we sold it. There was a lot of antiSemitism in the town. We were called Yid and other derogatory things.
I went to a public school and in the afternoons to a Jewish school. The Poles used to stand outside of Jewish stores and tell non Jews to buy from non Jewish stores. I belonged to a Zionist organization. We did what we could. There were fights between Jewish and non Jewish children.
When the Germans marched in we thought the Polish would get them out. I was in Ducklin visiting my brother when the Germans marched in. I went home by foot it took me three days to return home. After six weeks we left by night and my brother and I went to Russia . We were separated and I couldn't find my brother.
I was married in Russia in 1940 in the Ukraine. Very soon I was pregnant. My sister and I were tailoriong and sold to Jews. After the baby was born I didn't work. The Polish were worse to the Jews than the Germans. In Russia we did not see the Germans. I lived near the Caspian Sea. We were evacuated to Mahatchela. Conditions never were good, we lived in one room, lO people, nop washroom, no water. It was necessary to steal to live in Russia. We lived there 6 years from 11940-46 Two sisters went to Israel. One sister joined her husband in Iraguay. One sister is still alive and there are four children.
Polish and Ukranians were worse to us than the Germans. From Russian we went to Breslau and to Austria and Germany. After the war pogroms killed Jews. I spent 3 1/2 years in DO camps run by UNRRA. From Germany I went tyo Israel on a ship wehich took two weeks in a freighter. I had two children there. I spent 9 years in Isrtael. Then my mother in law wanted us to come to the US so we could be with the family and we went to Chicao where I worked in a store and a factoery. My husband was a mechanic and also worked in factories. We have been in Phoenix 8 years. My older daughter who is a college graduate works as a bookkeeper, my younger daughter is a secretary. I have 5 grandchildren. I wonder how I survived. I cannot tell everything.
