GRETEL ROTHSCHILD
FW: When and where were you born?
GR: August 5, 1922, in Nuremberg.
FW: Can you tell me a little about your education?
GR: For the first year or the first two years, I cannot remember whether it was one or two years, I went to a private school, but due to Hitler the school was disbanded then I had to go to a volksschule. For two years, I mean after four years then gymnasium.
FW: When you say school was disbanded due to Hitler, how early was t his?
GR: You are asking me a question for which I’m not prepared. What year did I start school? I was born in ‘22, I guess I was six years old. It can’t be. How old were we when we went to school in Germany?
FW: About six or seven.
GR: That doesn’t make sense.
FW: Well in any case you went to this private school, was it a Jewish school.
GR: I don’t know.
FW: Okay. And then you went to the volksschule?
GR: Yes for two years, but I went to the lycium in 1933, so it must have been at least 1929. I never really thought of it, but I know it was due to that fact. I had always been told. if it interests you I can try to find out if that was the reason.
FW: Okay.
GR: Because I have friends that went there too and I can check that out.
FW: Okay. That would be fine, but in any case you went to the volksschule there and then you went to the lycium. Did you intend to go on with your education?
GR: I went after lycium, by the way I graduated after five years of lycium, not six years. At that time Hitler changed the law. I then went on to the [ ] Institute for [ ] in Darmstadt. I was going to become a laboratory technician for either a brewery or a mill. It was a very highly specialized field, but I was always in Physics or Chemistry. I would probably have switched to the Gymnasium at some point and gone on to become a chemist or something like that, but due to hitler I never did. To even make an attempt at that point...We were looking for something for me to do where we thought I could get a job here. After I immigrated.
FW: While you were growing up in Nuremberg, and while you were in school, did you have many non-Jewish as well as Jewish friends?
GR: We couldn’t. I mean after Hitler there was a total separation. I mean I did go in the streetcar with a non-Jewish girl, but after awhile as much as she hated, and she was very frank to me, she said look, I dare not to be seen with you. I can’t afford it.
FW: This was while you were in the lycium?
GR: Yes.
FW: In the lycium were there non-Jewish children?
GR: We were a minority. Very minority. At first I believe there were more in the classes, and then came this law, but I have no idea what year or what. But unless the father were a veteran of the war, World War I, every Jew was thrown out of the l lycium.
FW: And your father was a veteran?
GR: My father had been a veteran, an army officer so I had no problems as far as that was concerned.
FW: How did you feel after your friends had to leave the school whose fathers were not?
GR: You see I have no recollection whether any of my immediate friends in my class were involved. I had friends in other schools. Nuremberg had more than one lycium. And a very close friend of mine was definitely thrown out and there were several other people, but I cannot speak of any of my school comrades. I don’t recall.
FW: Do you remember any discussions around this time with either this friend, or other girls about the situation in Nuremberg?
GR: No I don’t, but I’ll tell you another thing that happened. It was either in the first or second grade of the lycium, we had a math test and I very clearly remember we had some aggregates to figure out. And after the test, when the test came back the figures were put on the blackboard, the correct answers were put on the blackboard. After the decimal there were six or seven ciphers or whatever you call them, whatever you call them in English. I was handed my paper back and I had a failure on it. And another girl, I knew I had every single answer correct because I had kept on another little piece of paper, as was our custom, our answers we kept. And we weren’t handed our papers back, we were only told our marks. And we used to compare. I was a very good mathematician, with a non-Jewish girl in class. And we had compared our answers and the two of us varied in one of the points behind the decimal, one of the answers, and I had the answer that was on the blackboard, and I had a failure, I had a four. We were graded one to four or one to five, I don’t know anymore because they changed that around at one point too. And she got up and said to the teacher I got a one and she got a four, and she has the answer that is on the blackboard. I cannot let a Jew be first in class, was the answer.
FW: How did you feel about that?
GR: How can you feel about something like that? How can you feel about something like that?
FW: Did you have any other such. . ?
GR: At that time my mother went to the director of the school. There was absolute proof of what happened here. The teacher was known to be the Nazi in school, and I did get the one on my report card. This did not ever happen again.
FW: Do you remember going home that afternoon?
GR: No, I don’t. I have no recollection of my feelings.
FW: Because you mention that your mother went to school, so I assume that.
GR: I cannot say that I have a recollection of my feelings. I only felt very strongly for the girl who had the guts to get up and say that.
FW: After Hitler came to power...
GR: Hitler was in power at that time, that’s why I’m thinking this must have happened in second grade rather than the first year. I don’t think this would have happened in the first year, because the first year was 1933, so I think this must have been 1934, but I have never bothered to really go into it.
FW: As Hitler came to power, and as his power became stronger, did you notice a difference in the attitude of the gentile kids in school towards. . ?
GR: They didn’t know us any more. They were afraid.
FW: What made them afraid, that you noticed?
GR: Some of us did h ave, or some of my friends in class were closer to some of the non-Jewish girls than I was. And they would like to go to their houses, but they were afraid to be caught, because they were being threatened. They had to join the BDM, but they were threatened that they could not be seen with Jews or whatever not. I mean exactly the threats, what the threats were verbatim, I would not know. I couldn’t tell you that.
FW: Did you, I mean children like to belong, and when you saw all these girls going to BDM meetings, didn’t you?
GR: Yes. I belonged to the [ ] or whatever, I’ve forgotten the exact name. To my knowledge it was the non-zionist youth group
FW: Did this spring up during the early Nazi years?
GR: Whether it existed before or not, I don’t know.
FW: But most of the Jewish girls did go?
GR: Yes, we all belonged to that. I mean there was a zionist, there was another group. I can’t remember the name.
FW: Do you remember in going to these youth group activities and so on, do you remember any discussion of feelings?
GR: I don’t think we had discussions of feelings. Let me put it this way. I’m under the impression at that time particularly, feelings of people were never of great importance. I think the feeling, that part of the human being, is much more cultivated here than it ever was in Europe. You did your job because you had a job to do, you weren’t asked whether you liked your job or not. I mean the main thing is I’m not going now as a child, but my whole concept as I recall and seem to remember of them, you were doing things because you wanted to earn money, but nobody would defer money to feelings.
FW: But at this time, when you were in this group, what types of activities did you engage in?
GR: Sports. Literature. Music. Maybe we even did some handiwork. I have forgotten to tell you the truth. It was just a gathering of the people so that we had something to do together.
FW: What did you father do for a living?
GR: My father was in the management of the glass industry. The flat glass industry.
FW: Was that a big industry in Nuremberg?
GR: Yes. He was director of a flat glass [ ], the manager of a firm that belonged to the [ ].
FW: How did Hitler’s rise in power affect him?
GR: It affected him greatly inasmuch at one point he had to, though he had a lifelong contract he had to retire. But that was only in 1938.
FW: But up until that time do you remember how he felt about Hitler’s being in power in Germany?
GR: Well let’s face it, who liked it. Everybody was against it. How could a Jew be for it? I cannot. I was very much in my house a child. I don’t think I was ever present at any adult discussion.
FW: I don’t think that was particularly unusual. Do you remember ever thinking, Hitler won’t last long?
GR: Now that is something that has come up in discussions here. I cannot say I remember it as of then.
FW: That’s what I wanted to know.
GR: People here have said how many of us, not particularly that it would have been my parents, do know of conversations that Hitler would last that long. I also know, and these are only conversations that I recall here, is that people would say (in German) but I also have to say that due to my father’s business position, he was not forced, he never felt forced to get out at an earlier date, unfortunately.
FW: So in other words, they did not think of emigration until after 1938.
GR: They had thought of it before. They must have definitely thought of it before, but his people always said we’ll transfer you or something like that if we have to, and didn’t figure it would work out, I don’t think that his business connections, which were all non-Jewish, ever thought it would come to this point.
FW: When you say his business connections were all non-Jewish, did he also socialize with these business connections?
GR: No. These business connections were not in Nuremberg. My father worked in Furth. They were sitting in [ ]. These people who had the say in what to do, the chairman of the board and all this all in [ ]. They of necessity would not socialize with them because they were not there.
FW: I mean of the people who were in Furth or Nuremberg?
GR: I only know, whether my parents formerly socialized, I have no recollection of the years 1922 to 1932. I was too young. That I would not know. I was always with my kinderfraulein. I never had anything to do with my parents’ social life.
FW: When you say kinderfraulein, you had like a governess?
GR: Yes.
FW: Taking care of you. Were you an only child?
GR: Yes.
FW: To you knowledge did your parents go to the theater. . ?
GR: Always. The opera, the theater. Always.
FW: Did they encourage you in your younger years?
GR: Yes, very much so.
FW: You mentioned. . ?
GR: I mean I went to all the children’s performances of the opera, the theater. There were children’s performances. I was taken to the opera.
FW: Were you ever stopped from going to the theater or the opera?
GR: That must have happened at a point, but also here I have no personal recollection. When they lost their subscription to these things I don’t know, but I know they did.
FW: You mentioned that you finished the lycium, and then why at that point did you decide to go to this academy in Darmstadt?
GR: Because we were figuring out that it would give me a trade or profession that I possibly could utilize here. I should be utilized. It was an excellent field. There was only one hitch to it when I came here. I had very high recommendation from a man who is a world renowned in the field at that point. And I had a recommendation to a professor at the university of Minnesota, which specialized in this field. And the gentleman wrote me the loveliest letter, invited me to come, invited me to take any course that I wished to take. They wi ll take care of me, anything that I wanted to do, however in all fairness, he would dissuade me from continuing this study because this was a field that was completely, 100 per cent masculine, and he did not think that any female within the foreseeable future had a chance to break into it.
FW: This letter you received in Germany?
GR: Here. After having left Germany. I only wrote to this professor here. When I arrived here. There was an interlude while I was in Scotland. We are now getting, I mean if you want to go chronologically let’s skip that part.
FW: Okay. We’ll go back. When you went to this academy, when did you decide to do this. Do you have any idea what year you went to Darmstadt?
GR: In 1938. I graduated from the Lycium in 1938. April ‘38 or something like that.
FW: So by then you realized that you were going to leave Germany?
GR: Oh we knew. There was no question that we would, the question was to when.
FW: When did you decide to leave Germany?
GR: I cannot tell you when my parents decided that. I had no part in it and I cannot tell you. My life was presented to me by my parents. I had no say, nothing asked, except that they knew that I had the ability for Physics and Mathematics. I had additional private lessons in Chemistry because my school was not training me well enough for what we were doing. What I was preparing myself for so that...
FW: What were your last years in the lycium, just before 1938 like?
GR: I hated it, because I felt very unwanted. I had several teachers who didn’t like, there was another mathematics teacher who just couldn’t stand that a Jew could do mathematics better than some of the others. It was not pleasant.
FW: When you say you did not feel wanted, how did that make itself known to you in school?
GR: You felt a hostility by teachers more than by students. By certain teachers. Although other teachers were as straight, as correct as they could be. If you wanted to answer a question, I mean we were, our classroom was different from the school here. If the question was asked we had to raise our hand. Now at times we would be totally ignored. Maybe if nobody else could answer the question we would be called on.
FW You mentioned that the teachers were worse than the students. Did you ever receive any support from the students?
GR: No. I don’t think there was any more discussion of receiving support. The only support I got was the one incident that I mentioned.
FW: Did anyone ever, students or. . ?
GR: I was never overtly any more cheated in any which way. It was not done. It was done in a very subtle way. Just being a non-person. Let me put it that way. Being a non-person. That’s I guess what I felt, many a time. That’s a feeling that I could recall.
FW: Do you remember ever seeing signs “Juden [ ]?”
GR: You saw them daily, not once, but a thousand times. I mean there was graffiti like that. I mean that was the first graffiti I ever saw.
FW: Did you think of yourself, you were a young girl, and having been subjected since 1933, you were 11 years old to mounting pressures or signs, whatever it is, did you feel yourself something different, or something. . ?
GR: No. Never. I came from a very supportive home, but on the other had a very, very strict father, an exceedingly strict father to whom the grades in school meant a great deal and you studied, studied you head off to get it.
FW: Did you think ever, did you come from an orthodox or an observant home?
GR: No. Absolutely not.
FW: Liberal?
GR: Yes. Exceedingly liberal.
FW: Did the thought ever cross your mind why the Jews should be singled out by the Germans?
GR: No. I mean you are asking me what I thought then. I don’t think other than in religious school discussions I don’t think my friends and I were discussing it, but I cannot recall, I cannot give you an answer.
FW: When you saw these signs ”Juden [ ]” on stores, did you ever go in?
GR: I doubt it very much. I don’t think so.
FW: Do you remember seeing any parades or any, I mean Nuremberg was the beginning?
GR: Well, we lived two blocks behind the Reich { } galinder, that will answer you. We saw them strut day in and day out. We were there when they had [ ] so I saw more than I ever hoped to see, as a matter of fact we saw last night on television I don’t recall which program it was, they showed yugoslavia, was it on the 60 Minutes program on Sunday? They showed Tito and they showed his army, and they were goose-stepping and I got the shudders. I said to my husband, oh, I can’t take it, because I remember the sound, and this is a sound that gives me a pain. I experienced that same thing. My father had a secretary who was a [?} . She had a source where she knew things that were going to happen and she told them in advance. My husband and I were in Europe for the first time in 1962. We were in Amsterdam. We got a phone call saying that the woman is fighting for her life. She is in the hospital. All she’s doing, she’s asking for me. Would we come? So we went into Germany. it was the first time. We crossed the border in the train in Achen, or near Achen. And the people who looked at the passports, the border patrol, wore boots, and walked with the same step. I was shaking when this man came and asked for my passport, and he realized what was what, and he apologized to me. He said please, don’t be afraid. You have no reason to be afraid here any more. He saw my passport, he saw my name, he saw where I was born, and I was shaking. But what caused me to shake was that footstep. There I’m traumatized. There’s no question about that.
FW: You mentioned Reich... Could you describe just a little bit what events took place on that kind of a day?
GR: It was gathering of all the Nazi organizations, they would march with flags waving, hundreds of flags, and singing, and then they would all stand and listen to Streicher and whoever else was there speak. If you have ever seen, I’m sure in your interviews you have come across the Schturmer. If you grow up with this.
FW: Did you read Der Schturmer? Did you as a 15 or 16 year old?
GR: I saw Der Schtermer. I saw all the lies in there, and I saw the distortions and I saw the caricatures and frankly speaking, once in a while when I see some caricatures of Henry Kissinger, I haven’t seen him since he was a child, I see this caricature and I say that’s Hitler, Scht...
FW: Did you also have Volkischer Bobachter?
GR: I mean they were around. We didn’t buy or subscribe to either, naturally. You couldn’t help seeing them.
FW: You mentioned that by this time you were pretty sure you were going to emigrate. how did your parents go about trying to get out of Germany?
GR: I do know that my parents got affidavits to come over here, but they also knew that their number was too high, and so my father through his business connections was eventually given a chance to go to Belgium.
FW: Through what we would call a transfer?
GR: No it was not a transfer because they couldn’t get him working papers. It was only very temporary asylum until they could arrange to get to America.
FW: Were you still in Nuremberg on Crystal Night.
GR: Yes, I was in Darmstadt.
FW: And your parents were still in Nuremberg?
GR: Yes.
FW: What happened. . ?
GR: Now, this involves the secretary, again most likely, who will never admit to it, but it could hardly have been anybody else. I mean I was not at home, but this is what happened to my parents. We lived in a house with a pretty large garden, and had a huge dog. The dog was on a chain, permitting it to get to the front door and to the back door, but not to the garden gate. And my parents got a phone call in the early, I believe it was after midnight. My parents were sound asleep. And a voice said to them, my father who answered the phone - muffle your bell and let your dog off the chain, and hung up. And this is what my father did. My parents had no idea why or what. Some time later they saw because they could watch from a point, without being seen of course, hordes of Nazis in uniform, come to our neighbors, ring the bell, break down the doors, enter the house and after awhile come out. They watched them approach our house. They rang the bell, but of course the bell made very little sound because it was muffled. The dog started a rampage, and they moved on. The next morning my parents found blood at the front gate. Why they did not shoot the dog, why they moved on, nobody will ever know. My parents were about the only people unhurt, or untouched in the whole neighborhood. The houses were destroyed. And this is why as I mentioned to you I went to Germany in 1962, and this is my reason for going. Whenever I go to Europe, I go to see this woman.
FW: Understandable. You were in Darmstadt at the time, what happened to you on. . ?
GR: Absolutely nothing. I had gone, I knew nothing of the Crystal Night. The next morning I went to my lab, I went to school, I went to the [ ] Institute, and only after I got back, I stayed with a Jewish family, did I find out what had happened. And I was told your parents are on the way to get you. And I would imagine this is when my father told his people in the Rhineland, I am going. They did not want them to go, because my parents came by car, picked me up and we went up to Achen. And they roadblocks all over for Jews. Again, there’s a miracle. We were never stopped. We got to Achen. My father saw, I remember very well that my mother and I went to the Achen Cathedral. I had never seen it, and it was felt that we would be safe there. And my father went into conference with his people. I don’t remember whether we went to Cologne or not, because i mentioned the Rhineland before. Because some of the people were in Cologne. I know definitely that at that point we were in Achen, and we went back to Nuremberg, but I never went back to school, to Darmstadt.
FW: All right. When you went to the Cathedral did you wait there for your father?
GR: No recollection. I have absolutely no recollection. I think I once asked my mother what did we do in Achen, where were we, and I think my mother does not recollect either. It was so traumatic that we probably did block it out. But I recollect going to the Cathedral in Achen.
FW: When you say it was so traumatic I can imagine the amount of fear.
GR: Fear is not the word for it. Fear is not the word for it and I frankly think I still have some emotional fear of certain things today.
FW: When you say fear did you feel it was a life threatening situation?
GR: Always.
FW: Do you remember your father’s reaction as you were driving from Darmstadt to Achen?
GR: No I don’t. I will also tell you I had an exceptionally intelligent father, an exceedingly disciplined man. If you want to describe my father I have to describe him one way whether that’s a compliment or not I don’t know. Though he was a Bavarian, he was a typical Prussian officer.
FW: What about your mother at this time, what do you remember about her reaction after Crystal Night?
GR: Very lucky. Except mother was always here for me. She was very protective.
FW: How did she try to protect you?
GR: How did she try? I never analyzed it. I always felt warm and safe when I was with her, but that’s about all. How or why, I’ve never gone into psychological analysis.
FW: I was just looking for her reactions to that time too.
GR: My mother was part of my father and my mother did what my father said. My mother was a rather educated woman, for that time. She had gone to the Gymnasium, but married before she finished, I mean before she went on to higher... There were few people who had finished Gymnasium.
FW: Let me ask you. You mentioned during the time you had finished the Lycium you were in this Institute in Darmstadt.
GR: It was only about half a year. It was only from about April ‘38 ‘til November.
FW: Was this permissible for Jews?
GR: I was taken. They knew I was a Jew, the people there. However I had a totally non-jewish name, and by that they could probably get away with it covering it towards other.
FW: What was your maiden name?
GR: [unreadable] So nobody per se ever suspected it. And it was not known that I was Jewish. No question about it that I made a point of not letting it come out.
FW: But you say they knew when they accepted you?
GR: No question about it. I even believe that the professor, I mean the man who ran this Institute [ ] was a half Jew himself. I believe that.
FW: So you think that there was some. . ?
GR: The rest of the family was not Jewish, but I believe and his name which I will not mention, would indicate it to me, and I have a hunch he was. Whether it was known to my parents or not, I don’t know.
FW: When you mentioned that your father came back from his meeting in Achen and you went back to Nuremberg. . ?
GR: I believe at that point my father did not go back to work ever again.
FW: How long were you in Nuremberg before you left Germany, at that point?
GR: I left on May 3, 1939. My parents left later.
FW: In other words this was a half a year more after Crystal Night. During that half a year after Crystal Night. . ?
GR: I went to volksschular, Berufschuler I think, let me figure out. I was not yet sixteen years old. And to my knowledge you had to go to school until you were sixteen, and therefore I was forced to go to this Berufschuler, or whatever not, it was part of the volksschuler, because we were finished already. I went there for a couple of months.
FW: Was this set up by the H___stein or the Reich___ for purposes of training you to. . ?
GR: I have no idea. The Yiddushevolksschuler existed all along. This was the Jewish lower school and in Furte it was the Jewish realschuler. Why it was called this I have no idea.
FW: Did you feel, how did you feel about the quality of your education at that point?
GR: What I was doing there was just wasting time and we all knew it. Everybody knew it. It was gathering with friends, let’s put it that way.
FW: With your father so intent on good grades and a good education, how did this, how did knowledge of this kind of an education affect him?
GR: It wasn’t a question of education at all at this point, this was an interim thing that had nothing to do, it never came up.
FW: You mentioned before that your parents knew that their number was too high, what did they do to try and save themselves at that point?
GR: Well, they knew that his business associates were making the arrangements to get him to Belgium. It was a very, very difficult thing, but since these people were all pretty high in industry, they had government connections to get him into Belgium, and he got a very small subsistence in Belgium.
FW: During that half a year after Crystal Night did things get worse in Nuremberg?
GR: I don’t know if they could get worse anymore anyway. It was horrendous. I mean you couldn’t go any place. And I have only one recollection, always hearing these footsteps. In front of our house people were passing, and they all wore these boots. This is something I remember lying awake at night and hearing these footsteps. You always had the fear, are they coming to get you. Are they coming to kill you? What are they doing next?
FW: After Crystal night, I mean they took many of the men. . ?
GR: My family was not taken, but my friends and relatives, yes.
FW: Did you see many of them coming back, returning, did you ever hear stories of what had happened to them. . ?
GR: Yes. We also know that one man, I remember quite clearly that one of my father’s friends or acquaintances was so badly, either he was already in a hospital at that time, or he was hurt in the hospital, but as a result of the Crystal night he died. I do not know was he so badly hurt and got to a hospital or was he taken out of bed in a hospital, because they did anything and all.
FW: When you say you couldn’t go anywhere, you literally did not go out of the house?
GR: Oh yes, you could go out of the house, but you couldn’t go to the theater, you couldn’t go. . , except for seeing your friends within your house, now I am not even sure, and I don’t know it whether these jewish organizations even existed after Crystal night like the D____, I don’t even recall.
FW: Was you life mostly seeing your friends?
GR: Yes.
FW: How did you, you mentioned you went to Scotland, how did that come about?
GR: All right. Friends of my parents emigrated to London. Lived in an apartment building, and one day a neighbor’s son who was a Methodist minister came to them and said, I’m getting married in a few months, my parents have this large apartment here, they are in a position to rescue a girl from Germany. I mean we had decided that we want to do something, and the best thing is we feel is to get a German Jewish girl. They will have a young person in the house, she can possibly be helpful to them in a little way and that’s what we’d like to do. These friends mentioned the name of someone and the arrangements were made that that friend, that child would come to London. And some months later, I don’t think this girl had arrived yet because they weren’t married yet, I don’t think so, the Scottish fiancee of this Methodist minister came to visit, heard about this arrangement, how fantastic, that’s a marvelous idea, my father just passed away, I will be married in the near future, how about my mother and my sister will be the only ones in that large house in Scotland. Let me go and speak to your neighbors. And I was the person that was contacted. My first contact with my Scottish foster mother was the loveliest of lovely letters you would ever want to read. That was followed by weekly letters of the two daughters. Dear Sis we are waiting for you. Can’t wait ‘til you come. I must say that due to this fantastic human endeavor of these people, some of my horrendous experiences in Germany are blocked out. Because I had the good fortune of seeing another side of humanity, after having seen this animal society I saw really the [ ].
FW: When you first got the news of such a situation existing, how did you feel about it?
GR: I felt very leery, very apprehensive, and very excited. But as it happened my girlfriend who just lived in the second house from me was also in the position, they had friends in Glasgow, these friends contacted people in another little town in Scotland and this girl knew that she was going to go to a town Ayr, which by the way is near the Prestwick airport, at that time Prestwick was nothing, but today anyone who goes to Europe knows the Prestwick airport, and when that letter came to me from Scotland I was invited to come. We went to a map and I remember blurting out, we’ll be eight miles apart. It made all the difference in the world. If you want to ask me how I left I will answer that if you want to go chronologically. Yes I’d rather go chronologically. It’s to your advantage to go chronologically because you want to know how. Now I can come with feelings, because prior to that I have no recollection. I went out of Germany with a kinder transport.
FW: How did you arrange that?
GR: My parents did I have no knowledge how that was being arranged. So did my girlfriend who left about six weeks before me. Another dear friend went to England go her aunt, but I think she also left with the children’s transport. So leaving with the children’s transport meant relatively little except that when my parents took me to the station I had the feeling that I would never see them again. That is also something that is still in me.
FW: I remember your mentioning seeing “Fiddler on the Roof.”
GR: That’s exactly it, when that girl sang Fiddler on the Roof as I mentioned at that meeting, my mother had given me tickets for “Fiddler on the Roof” as a present. And I believe I am the only one who did not enjoy “Fiddler on the Roof,” because it was emotionally too much for me, because when I saw that girl sitting at the railroad station, I just, it was me all over again.
FW: You remembered yourself sitting at. . ?
GR: I was standing at the platform going into that train, and the first few minutes on that train. I was very attached to my parents and I never thought I would see them again. At the time, and I also know emotionally I was afraid to cross the border. What would they do at the border? Now I had traveled out of the country during Hitler and never really had any problems, but I had heard such horror stories, but none of it occurred.
FW: When you said you had traveled out of the country, where had you gone?
GR: We had gone to Switzerland before, and we had gone to Italy. We had gone on a Mediterranean cruise, as a matter of fact I had spent my fourteenth birthday on the Acropolis, which was the strangest thing because I had dreamt I would spend my fourteenth birthday on the Acropolis, and I did not know until the day we left on the trip. I was picked up at school by my father's chauffeur and was told I have to take you to one of the stores here. Your mother is waiting for you. There my mother was sitting, waiting for me having picked out a couple of dresses, and said, try them on, okay I’ll take this and I'll take that. I was bewildered and she said to me we are leaving for a trip to Italy and the Mediterranean. We are going to Palestine on a Mediterranean cruise and as it happened that boat docked in Pereus on August 5. I spent my 14th birthday on the Acropolis. And this dream I had this girlfriend, the same girl who lived two doors away, we were history buffs and geography buffs. We would always, and we were so familiar with the Acropolis. And I had told her months ago, do you know what I dreamt, so when it happened it was just beyond me.
FW: The reason I asked whether you had been out of the country during the Hitler years was, did your parents at that time make any effort, was this just a vacation?
GR: A vacation. My parents traveled at all times. My parents were in America without thought of coming back. That was in 1933 or 1934. My parents traveled all over all the time.
FW: But while you were on this, children’s, to get back to this children’s transport, what helped you get over those first moments, those first hard moments of separation?
GR: I think once we had been over the border I regained my composure. I knew I was going to see my uncle in London. I had an uncle, but he was in no financial position to support me. And I knew I was going to go there, and I knew I was going to stay with them for a few days before going to Scotland. But I had such fantastic letters. These people from Scotland. It was such a dream, that once I realized I was physically safe and didn’t have to cope anymore with the physical fear, and I only had to cope with the idea that I will never see my parents again, that I could manage that.
FW: That’s quite an idea to cope with that you’ll never see your parents again in terms of ...
GR: At that point I felt they would never get out of Germany.
FW: You knew though that they were making plans?
GR: I knew that they were making plans, but there were so many hitches and so many things which my father’s friends had not anticipated. They had thought they only had to open their mouth and here you go until they found out differently, and it didn’t work out. There was no malintent or anything of that nature, there was bureaucracy involved.
FW: When you were on this children’s transport were most of the children your own age?
GR: I cannot answer your question. I do not have the faintest idea today, who was on that children’s transport. I think I was so involved with myself. This in retrospect, but there’s also a block there.
FW: You got on the train at Nuremberg? How did you proceed from there?
GR: I believe we went out via Hock van Holland.
FW: So you went out through Holland and then across the Channel?
GR: Yes. The border was Holland. But where exactly...
FW: Were you stopped at the border?
GR: Oh definitely.
FW: What. . ?
GR: I do not believe there was a physical search.
FW: Did they realize it was all children?
GR: I do not know. I cannot tell you anything whatsoever. I even cannot remember my arrival in London and my meeting my uncle. I know I was in my uncle’s house for a week or so, and I remember very clearly my trip to Scotland. it was arranged. We had talked on the phone. It was arranged that I wear a certain outfit and it was either red or a white carnation was pinned to my lapel. I believe it was red, because I seem to visualize the girls being at the station in Glasgow with red carnations on. The two sisters. One wore a navy blue suit and the other a black and white checked suit. I see them as clearly as anything because they were standing right where the car stopped. They knew in which car I’d be and they knew exactly where to stand, and there they were.
FW: Had you met the sister who was marrying the Methodist minister?
GR: No, she was one of them. So there they stood. Hi Sis, so finally you arrive, and that was it. They were very concerned about the trip, whether I was hungry, whether I was well, whether I wanted to rest awhile before I went to Troon. No, no, I’ll go on, whatever you say. I was not scared.
FW: For myself, just in thinking about how I would feel, did you feel very homesick then?
GR: No. I think that the tremendous relief of the personal safety, and the concern about my parents didn’t let me be homesick. And I had never, as long as I stayed in Scotland, ever had any feeling of homesickness. I had the tremendous, I mean my main thought was my parents, my parents, but homesickness? Never. Because I had no cause. We got to Troon. I met my foster mother, a charming, what I would say an old lady by now, though she was not old really, but she was snow white, who told me in the first few minutes that she understands German, in emergency I may tell her, and she has all these dictionaries prepared, so there will be no problem for me to make myself understood. I spoke very broken English then. But she will not permit me to speak any German at any time because I was to learn English, and that was the sole thing that she wants from me. That she wants me to be able to relax, to breathe fresh air, to enjoy life, and all she can do to help me to get my parents out she will do. But I m ay not speak German, for my own sake. But I should feel safe in the knowledge that she understands it.
FW: That must have been quite a relief.
GR: Oh this woman was something else. She was a Quaker, though the children belonged to the Scottish High Church. I have never met such kindness, such wisdom, and she told me you can call me anything you wish to call me, but mother, that belongs to your mother. So I ask what is the name for mother in Scottish. So they told me it is either mither or in a somewhat more colloquial frame maw. So I said how about my calling you muthermoor? That was the name that stuck with her or stuck with me. This woman was known to my friends and my family in later years as muthermoor. Now I don’t know anymore was it a Tuesday or a Wednesday that I arrived. On the Friday the doorbell rang and she told me to go to the door and answer the door and I said how can I. I can’t speak English. I had English in school and I had private lessons, but still I felt very incompetent to open the door. She said go to the door, open it. You will know what to say, and I opened the door and my girlfriend stood there.
FW: The one from two houses away?
GR: Yes.
FW: She was with a family?
GR: She was with a family in Ayr. Eight miles away.
FW: And they brought her over?
GR: No. She had her brought.
FW: The woman that you stayed with knew. . ?
GR: Knew and arranged to have her brought. That was in the very first days my experience there. So you can imagine what a contrast it was for me from in Germany. A contrast in humanity.
FW: Did that strike you at the time?
GR: Very much so. Very much so.
FW: You mentioned that you felt so much like a non-person in Germany.
GR: And they helped me to feel like a person. That was their whole concept. I know I’m taking a lot of your time but there are more things coming which are incredible what this woman did. Saturday all the friends came.
FW: This was the first Saturday after you met your friend Friday?
GR: All the friends of the younger, the older sister who was getting married had very few friends in town because she had lived out of town, but she was back home now, she was a teacher. And she was just now shortly before she was getting married she was home for a few months. And the younger girl was in high school, and so everybody came in to welcome me. And so came one of the boyfriends of the younger daughter. The next thing i was told, I was out on the floor cold. I had absolutely fainted. They called the doctor who lived next door and he came in and I mean I came back and of course they were terribly concerned. They didn’t know what had happened. And it took me awhile to admit to them what had happened. The friend who walked in wore a tan shirt. It was like the Nazi shirt color. Needless to say neither he nor any of the friends every again wore a shirt of that size. But you can imagine my condition that that had happened.
FW: Did you know at the time, did you realize what?
GR: I knew what it was, ut I had, ti was a very difficult thing for me whether I should tell it or not, but then I felt they were concerned physically. That was wrong. I mean the doctor was there. The doctor was their friend, their next door neighbor so I felt I had to be honest. I didn’t want to mislead them into anything, so I told them the truth. But up to that point I myself had not realized how strongly it had affected me.
FW: That’s why I asked you if you realized it was the tan shirt?
GR: Yes I realized it, because the minute he walked in I saw myself go, so that was...
FW: How long did you live with these people?
GR: From May ‘39 to April ‘40. It was April ‘40.
FW: How as it, what was it like to adjust to living with other people in someone else’s house?
GR: Apparently very easy for me because I only have the most fantastic recollections. I was told what should I, what can I do in the house? I had first thought of myself coming as quasi like a maid, but I found out that was certainly not their idea at all. I felt grateful to come as a maid, but that was not their idea at all. To help around the house as everyone else was doing naturally, but nothing extraordinary. The only job that I was given, and that was my duty to take the dog for a walk. We were right across, you left the house through the garden, then came the road, and the other side was the beach. We were living at the seashore. And it was my duty, the dog had to walked for one full hour a day. I did not know that this was ploy to get me outside and walk for a day, for an hour, until much later. Everything they did was done with me in mind. They wanted me, the father had been the president of the golf club there. I had no idea what that meant. I could run around on that golf club. I hated that. They gave me lessons in golf. Forget it I don’t want to chase a ball. I didn’t know that the instructor then was a world famous golfer. I knew nothing. And at Troon a couple of years ago they had the world championship over there. I knew nothing. I had the run of that golf course, and I said thank you I’ll walk the dog on the beach and let me do it that way.
FW: You mentioned that these were Quakers?
GR: The mother was a Quaker and the daughters were brought up in the Scottish High Church.
FW: And they knew you were Jewish. Were you ever. . ?
GR: I will give you without asking the question. We were on Saturday. The next day was Sunday. These people went to church every Sunday. Now I was told the synagogue was in Ayr where my girlfriend was eight miles. The problem was transportation to there. But they would try to arrange it if I insisted. I was welcome to go to church with them if I wanted to. If I didn’t want to they understood why I didn’t want to. So I told them as they know I was Jewish. I do not need a synagogue to pray. I pray every day when I walk along that beach. That’s my house of worship, but on the other hand I also want to know about their religion and since they asked me to be a member of their family my beliefs are so, I believe in one God and they believe actually in the same God, I see no reason why I can’t go to church with them. They were very pleased and I went to church with them. That next day, that Sunday, the sermon that I heard, I wish I had a copy of the sermon. I couldn’t get it because it was impromptu. All that service was not once the name of Jesus Christ. There was only reference to God and the Lord. And that the congregation was welcoming a stranger whom they hoped would be very happy in their midst. That everybody present has only one thing in mind, to help her recover what she has gone through. So all that was said.
FW: Did it strike you as unusual?
GR: Yes I realized it immediately. I realized it immediately because I had their hymnals and their prayer books in front of me. I could read English, though I couldn’t speak it. I understood what I was reading and of course I can read, and I noticed in every prayer he changed it to the Lord.
FW: Did you every ask?
GR: Oh yes I spoke. I met the minister many times over the year, and the minute they knew I was coming they decided to do that. That whole little town knew I was coming, and that whole little town was helping me. Another episode, I can’t say was it in the first week or the second week. The bus, we were living a little outside the big town. The bus passed the house and I was put on the bus and told to go to the grocery store to get the groceries. I was given a grocery list. I was told I should ask for the things, I may hand the list to the man. I must ask for it because I was supposed to speak, so I took the bus and the conductor was told I had to get off there and I was told the grocery store MacIntosh’s was right across the street you go in there. And I was scared, and you say that you come for Mrs. Jamison and you have an order and I will pick it up and I got around and went in there and worked very hand to get everything out, and little did I know that they had phoned in the order already, but they were training me and that went on all over. Now my big sister got married in July. My birthday was on August 5 and a couple of days before then, I don’t know exactly the dates Mrs. Jamison set me to the station which was a suburb of Troon, we were in Barasea. To the Barasea station and told me to go the station master to pick up a package for her. I mean I was always sent on errands like this. This meant walking for a while. I mean I was never given any degrading job to do or anything that the children wouldn’t do. And I got to the station master and by then I spoke English rather well, and I told him I was to pick up the package for Mrs. Jamison and he said oh the baggage car will be there go to the lamppost and stand at the lamppost and the man in the baggage car will give you the package for Mrs. Jamison. Well the train pulled in, but it wasn’t a baggage car that stopped. But the baggage car was a little farther back. So the train stopped and I walked toward the baggage car and I heard a voice call Gretel and my other girlfriend stepped out of the car of the train.
FW: Your other girlfriend?
GR: My other girlfriend who had gone to her aunt in Manchester, England. She stepped out of the train.
FW: To visit you? These people had arranged it?
GR: They had arranged it.
FW: Amazing people.
GR: And after I left for America this girl spent every vacation with them. Was was in England until after the war. She went through the war, she’s an R.N. She went through the war until she could come here and she came then to us until her family got settled and all that and her family. These were amazing people. You have on one had the experience of Hitler on the other hand that human experience, it is quite a change, quite a difference.
FW: It’s interesting to see how different human beings can be. During all this time were you in contact with your parents?
GR: My parents got out on June 10, 1939. It was only, I took this out of chronological order. My parents, I got a telegram that they were out on June 10. They went to Belgium, they went to Brussels. And Mrs. Jamison arranged for me to telephone them in Brussels. And that was that.
FW: How did you reunite with your parents?
GR: In Liverpool, England. My parents got permission to board a boat in Liverpool. To go from Belgium via England to board the boat. I came from Scotland. I spent my last few days in England with my girlfriend in Manchester, and then went to Liverpool.
FW: Then your parents were able to stay in Belgium until their numbers came up?
GR: Well once my parents were in Belgium, my fears were gone. And it was a totally different life from then, then came the uncertainty of what would happen in America. But I had such confidence in my father that nothing I said to Muthermoor one day in discussion, if my father’s health holds out I have nothing to worry about.
FW: In terms of when you left Scotland...
GR: I will tell you, when I left Scotland I walked, we had to board the boat we were in a hall or a room and you had to walk down steps, and I walked down the steps, and my father came up the steps and passed me, he didn’t recognize me.
FW: In Liverpool?
GR: I had gained so much weight, I looked so different, that he did not recognize me. He walked past me. That was a shock I got, but I guess the different food and all that, and the relaxation. The nervous strain was gone. Well I lost all this weight very fast again.
FW: Do you also think that on his part it was the amount of tension he had gone through?
GR: I don’t know. I must say looking at the pictures of me in the passport I don’t know if I would recognize myself today. Let me put it that way. No I don’t think so. I didn’t know it was as painful to recollect as it is. Very painful to recollect all of this. I haven’t done this in years. I have blocked it out to a certain extent. I’ve had this traumatic thing with my husband for the last few years so I so this past thing hasn’t come up anymore till you came along and said something and this discussion and the temple, and “The Fiddler on the Roof” and the reaction to it.
FW: When you did reunite when was the first time you saw your mother?
GR: Two minutes after that.
FW: She followed your father?
GR: No. He went to look for me, then we turned around to look for Mother. No recollection actually. I mean we came here, were picked up at the boat by the parents of the girl who was eight miles away from me. We settled in Kew Gardens and started out. We had one room at first, and then got a little apartment.
FW: When you say you were picked up by the parents of the friend, did you stay with them?
GR: No. They had taken a room for us in Kew Gardens. They lived in Kew Gardens and they had taken a room for us in Kew Gardens.
FW: How did you all manage in the very beginning? I assume that your father only left with the ten Reichmarks?
GR: Exactly.
FW: How did you manage those beginning days?
GR: I don’t know whether friends helped. Really and truly I don’t know. I think I had thirty dollars or something. That was partly given me by my Scottish family. My mother also had some relatives who actually paid for my boat trip over here, but I got some money there. Where the money came from I, but I had thirty dollars.
FW: But in any case thirty dollars wasn’t going to take you very far either.
GR: I cannot answer that question.
FW: Did you father get a job?
GR: My father got a job very fast, also through pure coincidence, that the child of a friend of his was rooming with the son of someone.
FW: What kind of job did he get?
GR: I’m getting to it. The son knew, though he was a Czech, had heard about my father had been in the Czech glass industry, and had known who my father was, and he had known an old man here who for some time had been looking for someone who could go into his business, though he had two sons with him in the business, both geniuses with up to nineteen college degrees, but totally incapable of running a business. And he wanted somebody. But he told my father, you have to come in here as an office boy, sweep the floor, until I am ready to promote you. And that my sons don’t realize who you are. My father knew that eventually he could get a decent salary, eventually. Now this all worked out exceedingly well, and I don’t think that should be part of your, because that’s not me, that’s my father. It worked out exceedingly well for him.
FW: Just one question on it. Do you remember the first few days when he went in to sweep the floors and so on, do you remember any?
GR: No I cannot recall.
FW: And do you remember, how about yourself what happened?
GR: I babysat.
FW: In 1940 you were 18.
GR: Yes. I was a baby sitter.
FW: You babysat?
GR: Yes. And my mother worked as a cleaning lady.
FW: Speaking of that, how did your father feel about your mother working as a cleaning lady?
GR: That was the worst experience that you could possibly imagine. We only had one thing in mind. We’ve got to get money whatever way we can legally make money and we will keep our dignity with it.
FW: How did your mother feel about it?
GR: The same way. There was no feeling sorry for ourselves. I think there was such a relief being reunited that I don’t ever remember hearing my parents feeling sorry for themselves. Being safe. And we had always known that my father no matter what he would touch, would succeed. In this case that he would get something in his own industry was fantastic.
FW: The reason I asked it was that your mother had been used to maids, a governess.
GR: No problems. My parents were both very intelligent people. There was no problem absolutely. I don’t think in all these early years here in America did I ever hear anything, what happened to us. We had only to look forward, we didn’t look back.
FW: Good point. Did you mentioned that you rented a room. Was this in an apartment with other German Jewish people?
GR: No. No. That was in a boarding house run by German Christians who were very nice and very pleasant. Really tried to help us.
FW: That must have been an interesting experience in terms of their, they were German Christians.
GR: They were German Christians, but they were here for so long. It was a help that they spoke German, and they gave the appearance of being so anti-Nazi which I’m sure they were that there was no, you see we also had the experience, my father had the business experience of Germans who were not Nazis and his secretary in several instances other than the one I mentioned before proved her loyalty that we knew that not all Germans are rotten.
FW: Did you go back to school at all?
GR: Well then we come, as soon as my father saw that he was going from his nineteen dollars a week a little bit up he wanted me to continue with my education, and then is when I wrote to the professor in Minneapolis, the University of Minnesota wherever that is. And then he answered, in all fairness to you I think knowing your circumstances, since you cannot materially afford it I would have to advise you think of something else and don’t pursue it. It is a fantastic field and all that. So what am I going to do? I always said I can’t think of myself being a secretary sitting down writing a letter please us a dozen tubes of toothpaste, that’s been my, little did I know that in later years I would marry a man who was in the dental supply business. So we figured out what should I do, but we knew that I could not afford to go to college or to even get the high school equivalency credits and all that. I had to work and all that. So I went to business school, but took up legal, law stenography and became a law stenographer and worked in law offices. One of my bosses even sent me on a non-matriculating basis to law school. So I took law classes at NYU while I was working in his office. He paid for that.
FW: So when you took the law stenography?
GR: My father was able to pay for it. By then my father was able to pay for it.
FW: When you, I mean you were 18 years old when you first came here. Did you begin to establish a social life?
GR: With the children, I mean my friends from Germany and their group. There was a whole group. A whole gang. In Kew Gardens and spread over Manhattan. One of my neighbors, another neighbor the boys lived up here uptown Manhattan, and we would meet and would do things together. Would go to museums together, all the things that cost nothing together.
FW: How, did you join any organizations or . . ?
GR: No.
FW: I do have to go back for just a minute. When you were in this legal stenography school or classes did you find any difficulties, you were pretty well versed in terms of the language?
GR: None whatsoever because when I came to this country except for my tremendous Scottish brogue I spoke a much better English than I did today because in the last few years, particularly since the incidence with my husband I’ve been speaking, and since our daughter has left the house I’m speaking much more German again. I never had to grope for any English word I find myself doing these days and even not so very long ago discussed with my husband that fact which bothers me greatly today.
FW: My parents do that too, because they never did before, but that’s interesting.
GR: I mean I spoke English with my daughter till she was three years old when she was three years old I switched to German in the house. I promised never to speak German to her when we are outside the house or a third person present. A non-German speaking present.
FW: Why did you make that promise?
GR: She wouldn’t want me to speak German in front of her friends or anybody else.
FW: Did she voice that, did she say that?
GR: Oh yes. But she also realized that she had an opportunity to l earn a foreign language without any problem, and so we arranged it this way. She realized that at a very, very early age. And now she is very grateful for it. By the time she went to college she was exceedingly grateful for it.
FW: When did you, in looking back, what do you think was the greatest adjustment that you had to make here?
GR: The most difficult time was being an adult living at home with my parents.
FW: In what way do you mean that?
GR: Well I was twenty-six years old before I got married and the last few years were quite difficult because I had a rather authoritarian father who felt I was his child, and I had no right to my own opinions.
FW: And of course then there was no question of moving out on your own.
GR: I had no, first of all it was unheard of and anyway I was in no financial position to do that. I had a very, very good job. I don’t even want to say I was in no financial position. That may be even wrong, but I think it did not even occur to me it wasn’t done and also I was saving every penny that I earned. And that was instilled in me and I think my experiences make me do that. The thought of moving out did not occur. I knew I had to live with this.
FW: When you say that you were saving every penny, do you think you were part of a rebuilding?
GR: No.
FW: In terms of your own family?
GR: No. Why should I be part...
FW: In terms of rebuilding your family’s life, in terms of...
GR: No. I didn’t think in that frame. I didn’t.
FW: I mean that you were all struggling toward one end.
GR: I mean my father, after awhile he came into the position where he didn’t need any support from me. That I was not even contributing. I mean he wouldn’t let me know these things. Everything that I gave went into my account. At a much later date did I find out that it was all there.
FW: Did he insist that your mother stop working?
GR: Yes. At the first moment that that was possible. I mean that was the first thing there was.
FW: How did your mother feel about having to stop working?
GR: I have no idea. I can’t tell you, because then came a period, well then we had the war where working was self understood and all. I don’t know when my mother stopped working and, what was I going to say, there came a period, but that was later only after I was married I believe, that m y father and mother spent half a year in Kentucky. My father’s firm built a factory in Kentucky and he was there part of the year. Before I was married I was alone, my mother stayed with me, but after that she moved with him to Kentucky and they spent a half a year in Kentucky and a half a year in New York, but this is not...
FW: Today, in your life today do you think of yourself more in the American mainstream or more of the German Jewish refugee community?
GR: I don’t feel myself part of the American, I feel myself more of the American mainstream than part of the German Jewish community, but only in the sense of community. I feel myself much more part of being a German Jew if you ask me that way.
FW: That’s basically what, well in what sense...
GR: I want you to know I’m a notorious non-joiner partly due to my legal training and partly due to Joe McCarthy. That was the most frightening period because even though, I mean McCarthy was Communist hunting, whether you had Communist or Nazi, right or left whatever not you are doing, I approve as little of Communism as I approve of the Nazis, but I saw the same pictures. And that was the most frightening period and when he had some people on the stands that were fourteen years old when they were part of a group. He never gave them a chance to say I was fourteen years old. The cross examination, I mean I know from my law experience how cross examinations went. You cannot say, but I was only fourteen. Only yes and no. That made me so convinced, I don’t sign a petition that comes around, for nobody, for nothing, for no candidate even though I may be 100 percent for it. I will tell you that some members of the temple have approached me many a time. I have said I will do anything that you want me to do for sisterhood. They never approached me anymore and I said why? Well you are not a member of the sisterhood. You cannot make me join the sisterhood. I will not even join the sisterhood.
FW: But you mentioned that as being a non-joiner in terms of your friends today are most of them from the European refugee.
GR: Absolutely, absolutely.
FW: By choice?
GR: By choice and the fact that though we have met many Americans there has never been a rapport, and we do not care too much for acquaintances, wasting our time with acquaintances. We prefer to stay with friends.
FW: Why do you think the rapport was never there?
GR: Because most of these people, and there are some exceptions, have different values than we do.
FW: What do you mean by different values?
GR: What is of greater importance to them in life, which things are of greater importance to them, I mean than to, there’s a difference. They’d rather drive cadillacs and spend their money on cadillacs. I prefer to drive an oldsmobile and put the difference into my bank account.
FW: Okay. Do you feel that your own background, your own experiences over all that time has led you to more friends with people of your own background. You understand each other better?
GR: Probably. Now my husband had a very wide range of possibilities through business to make friends, but he had the same experience. Very, very few you would warm up to, because most of the time we say they live in a different world than we do.
FW: Do you think that while your daughter was growing up, did you think of yourself las a different parent, or do you think you were a different parent?
GR: We were different parents necessitated by two factors. One factor was that we were much older parents than most of her classmates parents were. Number two also, my upbringing, my very strict upbringing which I had sworn I would not do to my daughter, in a certain way translated itself into certain actions. And I heard for many, many years from my daughter what you did to me while I was in school, because I studied with her, and I made her work. Only very recently did she tell me an episode which really thrilled me. She had classes in the Getty Museum this year in California, and with the professors and the curator, our daughter is an archeologist, but went into archeology as a historian and not as an art historian or a classicist. And they were having a discussion, in fact when we were out there just now she showed me the object under discussion, and asked me to identify them, and she made an identification of two objects, one of which was the real thing, the other one was an imitation. And out of the class she was the only one who could do it, and the professor said I’m just plainly amazed, you are the only one in this class who is not an art historian. How can you do it? And she told the professor, the professor even said the way you do these things is better than I’ve ever seen it done, and even I cannot do it as well. And she said there is one difference as you didn’t have my mother as a mother, because I took my daughter to the museums several times a month when she was small, and I always had a girlfriend along and we played games.
FW: Just like the geography and the history games.
GR: Right. That’s exactly it.
FW: In terms of your own life do you feel that you had opportunity here?
GR: I’m perfectly satisfied. I’m exceedingly satisfied with my life. I will tell you. I had a fantastic job in one of the then largest law firms in New York. I had a great deal of satisfaction in my job. It also was a very nerve-wracking job. My husband claims that that killed my nerves. I believe it was Hitler who killed my nerves. I’m very high-strung these days. I mean I’ve always been,.
FW: Speaking of when you say Hitler and nerves did you ever return to Germany?
GR: Oh yes. I mean I mentioned, if ever I’m in Europe I go to Nuremberg to visit our friend.
FW: You mentioned that the first time was 1962.
GR: My attitude has totally changed. First of all you do not feel the goose-steps anymore. The boots are long gone. The border patrol does not wear those boots anymore. In the first few times I felt everybody is looking at me and everybody thinks,and with our name what it is we are always identified as Jews, if my mother goes she is not identified as a Jew, which is a vast difference. I’ve always felt very strongly, I still feel very strongly, on that, though I have gone to Germany quite frequently and no longer at all feel that way. I have overcome that.
FW: How do you feel, have you ever gone back to Nuremberg?
GR: Oh yes.
FW: Have you ever gone back to your home?
GR: I have looked at it several times. It doesn’t bother me in the slightest. It is somebody else’s house. It doesn’t mean a thing to me. I’ve shown it to my husband, I’ve shown it to my daughter. And that’s about it.
FW: Have you ever in being there made contact with Germans?
GR: There’s only once with my father’s secretary and her son and daughter-in-law, nobody else. I had no intention, as a matter of fact one of my former classmates asked me why don’t I contact some of our classmates. There was one girl whom I would have contacted. She was the daughter of a high army officer, for a very short time went to school with us, and she, though she quite openly told us that she had gotten into trouble because she was seen with me, she didn’t care a damn, nor did her father who was an army officer. But what happened to her or that family, I have no knowledge.
FW: Any of these people who were classmates or anything like that have you ever accidentally. . ?
GR: No. The only one I have come across is a girl who was half Jewish who emigrated and she lives in England. And she came over here one day and another classmate of mine and here in my house in the discussion with us said the hardest thing was that she was half Jewish. She was a non-person to everybody. She sat next to me in class and she said I always had a feeling that you didn’t trust me. I could take something or you could say something or do something to the other, for the others I was a Jew. This is what I told my daughter for all these years. I’m very, very liberal minded and as far as religion is concerned it wouldn’t bother me the slightest if you were to marry a non-Jew because of my experience with my Scottish family, and I only call them my family, however my experience with the Nazis would tell me marry a Jew only. I think we can top if off here by saying...she is marrying a Jew. (Just won a Fulbright to U. of Rome.)
