United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Frida Ruderman
October 15, 2010
RG-50.030*0590 PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a recorded interview with Frida Ruderman, conducted by Ina Navazelskis on October 15, 2010 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview took place in Cliffside Park, NJ and is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
FRIDA RUDERMANPRIVATE
October 15, 2010
Question: This is a United States Holocaust Memorial Museum interview with Frida Ruderman, on October 15th, 2010, in Cliffside Park, New Jersey. And I’d like to thank you, Mrs. Ruderman, for agreeing to meet with us, to talk with us today, and ask that you take your story from the very beginning. Tell us where you were born, when you were born, what was your birth name?
Answer: I was born in Se-Serei, which is ser-ee-ay.
Q: Serei. And where is Serei?
A: Yes, th – Lithuanian, Serei. I was born in February 26, 1925. I was a second child. I had a sister two and a half years older than I am. My father was a doctor. He was also born in se – Serei.
Q: Serei.
A: Serei, yes, but he studied in Warsaw, and finished his doctoral studies in Tartu, Estonia. It was a very famous university, and I have materials about it.
Q: Wow. And did he – in Warsaw, did he study in Polish, and then finish his studies in Tartu in Russian? Was that how he would have –
A: I – I – I think so, I think so, because my mother was born in Poland, in Pinsk, which later becomes the Soviet Union, after –
Q: Okay.
A: – you know.
Q: So your mother was born in eastern Poland?
A: Yeah, and my – I have my mother’s also, about her diploma, or whatever.
Q: What did she study?
A: She was a dentist.
Q: A dentist.
A: Yeah.
Q: So what is your father’s name? What was your father’s –
A: My father’s name is Layba(ph).
Q: Layba(ph)
A: Yeah, and we were naming him Lon.
Q: Mm-hm.
A: Lon Finkel.
Q: Finkel
A: But because in Lithuania you know, the – it sounds Finkeless(ph).
Q: Finkeless(ph), there’s always a – a Lithuanianized ending on the word –
A: Yeah.
Q: – on the name.
A: And he was born, I have the year, 1,000 – just a moment – wa – this doesn’t go to –
Q: No, this is fine.
A: No, one moment, between directories [indecipherable]
Q: Mm-hm.
A: Yeah. Finkeless(ph), so he was born in thousand 889.
Q: 1898, mm-hm.
A: Yes, in Serei.
Q: Mm-hm. Do you have the date?
A: Hm?
Q: Do you have the date he was born?
A: His date I have by memory.
Q: Okay.
A: That was twel – May 12th.
Q: May 12th.
A: For my f – mother I don’t –
Q: Don’t know the date of her birth.
A: No, but for my mother I know the year, one – one year later.
Q: 1898 – ’99?
A: Ni-Ni – ’90. He was ’89, and she was –
Q: Eighty-nine.
A: Eighty-nine.
Q: Eighty-nine.
A: One hundred – 1889.
Q: Okay, 1889.
A: And she was one hundred – 1890.
Q: Ninety was mother’s birth.
A: Yeah, and her name was – maiden name was Gotlieb.
Q: Gotlieb.
A: Yeah, and the spelling is g-o-t-l-i-e-b.
Q: G-o-t-l-i-e-b.
A: Yeah.
Q: What was her first name?
A: Her first name, given name was Minuha(ph).
Q: Minuha(ph).
A: Minuha(ph), and maiden name Gotlieb – Gotliebeiter(ph).
Q: It would be in Lithuanian, what – but if she was born in Poland –
A: But she was – yeah?
Q: – then how would it have been –
A: Gotliebuvna(ph), and it’s very funny, the name and with a ji – g it is Goona(ph) which is a bad word.
Q: Oh, is it really?
A: But in – I – I – I don’t know exactly, but here she was Gotliebeiter, but she changed her name to Finkel(ph), and she was Finkelena(ph).
Q: Finkelena(ph), that’s right.
A: Yeah.
Q: And your sister’s name?
A: Hm?
Q: Your sister’s name?
A: Sister na – sister’s name Etta.
Q: Etta.
A: And she was born two and a half years, I – I don’t have a date – the dates of her.
Q: So she would be 1922.
A: Yeah, I was 25, she was 22.
Q: Yeah, Etta, born in ni – did you have any other siblings?
A: No.
Q: No, there was two girls?
A: You have two – two girls, yeah. And na – na – nothing more, we had only in the same Serei a first cousin, a boy and a girl tow – also Etta. Etta is alive. She is in Israel, but in very bad conditions now, you know, she cannot talk. And so – Lola was killed with all Sereiers(ph). And he was a little older, and he was also a – both Etta, my sister, and l – ler – Lola, we named him, they were students in Kaunas, of the medical –
Q: Faculty?
A: Faculty, yeah.
Q: Your father, he was – was he Serei’s only doctor?
A: He was first only the one doctor.
Q: Uh-huh.
A: And it was absolutely un – unbelievable, I cannot believe now how it was. We had sometimes very often at night –
Q: Mm-hm – a knock on the door.
A: Knock on the door, somebody came – not brought a patient, but came to take my father to 25 kilometers to a village.
Q: Yes.
A: And he was used to it. And now herring so – hearing so – a lot about all that, you know, killings, he never – we never thought that something can happen, it was – it was coming back. But he was so – you know, organized that when – and we didn’t have electricity in Serei at night, so immediately my mother light on the –
Q: A candle?
A: – candles, and he knew where everything is, and in 10 minutes he was ready. And if it was in the wintertime, they were coming with a very good, you know, to put in –
Q: Yes.
A: – to make him war – feel warm.
Q: Mm-hm.
A: And that was taking sometimes two, three, four hours, because it was far away. And people liked him, and were saying, whatever Dr. Finkel(ph) says, you can go to Alytaus, you can go to Kaunas, everybody will say the same.
Q: So they trusted him.
A: Not because it’s my father.
Q: No, but this is what the –
A: He was very devoted to his specialty, he liked the children, they all liked them when they were meeting, and very often he cried if something happened to a – to a patient.
Q: Patient, yeah.
A: Yeah. I remember this very well.
Q: Can you – do you remember any particular instances of a patient not surviving, and he then took it very hard?
A: Not surviving, nobody survived.
Q: No, no, no, I’m talking – you said he cried –
A: Ah, yeah, that was Fina(ph) Lipski was her name, and she had heart problems. And he was taking a lot of care of her, but nothing could be done, and she died. It was a very, very – for my father it was like a tragedy.
Q: How – was she an older lady, was she a young child?
A: No, no, she was a little younger than my father was. She had a family, she had a daughter, I don’t remember, unfortunately the name of her daughter. And she was a very nice lady, and she died, and that was, for all our family very –
Q: Hard.
A: – hard, yes.
Q: Were there –
A: Later, later, much later, a few years before the war, came another doctor who mostly was doing abortions, and working with women like a – you know, like a –
Q: A gynecologist?
A: Mm-hm.
Q: I see.
A: But he was murdered next to his house.
Q: Also a Jewish doctor?
A: Yeah, a Jewish doctor –
Q: Jewish doctor.
A: – yes, Jewish doctor. No other doctors. And my father was very friendly with the owner of the apatek(ph).
Q: With the drugstore.
