United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Anna Wajcblum Heilman
August 10, 1994
RG-50.030*0258 PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a taped interview with Anna Wajcblum Beilman, conducted on August 10, 1994 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
ANNA WAJCBLUM HEILMAN
August 10, 1994
01:00:28
Question: Tell me your full name and when and where you were born.
Answer: My name is Anna Heilman. My Polish name is Hanka. I was born Hanka Wajcblum. My Hebrew name is Hanna. I was born in Warsaw, Poland. Warsaw, before the war, still is, the capital of Poland, and used to be called the little Paris. It was a beautiful, beautiful city. My parents were Jacob and Rebecca Wajcblum. They were both deaf as separate incidents in their childhood. My mother as a result of a scarlet fever and my father as an accident, when boiling water came and scalded him and he became deaf. They met in the institute for the deaf, got to know each other and married. I am the youngest of the three daughters that they had. My sister Sabina (ph), who lives today in Sweden, Stockholm, my sister Esther, who was executed by the Nazis, in Auschwitz, on January 5th, 1945, 13 days before the evacuation of Auschwitz, and me. We went to an all girl's school in Poland, where we were a product of the Polish education, where patriotism and religion is very closely related, where bravery and chivalry is a part of us, and were also a product of the parallel Jewish culture that celebrated the holidays. My parents were rather assimilated, but that does not mean that they weren't Jewish. Before the war, we went to school, my father went to work, my mother kept the house. In the summer, we used to go way, way, way far away in the north in Poland into a little resort town.
03:00:00 And we never seen Warsaw in summer; every year we went away. I remember when the war broke out, August 1939, we were in Druskieniki this little resort town. The mobilization, the Polish mobilization was on, and all the vacationers were gathering, trying to get on any kind of a transportation to go back to their place of origin. My mother was making preserves. This was the seasons to make preserves and this is what she was doing. My father was livid. He wanted to go back to Warsaw. My mother said: "Look, I have lived through one war and I know what's needed. Now is the time to do preserves, we will need them." And she did. Eventually, we left with the last regular train that left Druskieniki back to Warsaw in September.
Q. Okay. I just want to do one thing. I'm afraid my alarm on my watch is going to go off, so let me try to figure out how to make it go off. I don't know. I'm going to put it outside. Why don't you cut for a second. Now I want you to tell me about Warsaw after the war broke out and where you and your family lived and about what you remember of the forming of the ghetto. Tell me a little bit about before you were deported.
