United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Edward Klein
August 16, 2010
RG-50.030*0580 PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a recorded interview with Edward Klein, conducted by Jacek Nowakowski on August 16, 2010 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
EDWARD KLEINPRIVATE
August 16, 2010
Question: Today is the 16th of August, 2010, and I’m Jacek Nowakowski, conducting interview with Mr. Edward Klein, who is a survivor of the Lódz ghetto. And Mr. Klein, if you could state your vital statistical information, when you were born – you – you just mentioned different names that you were known, etcetera, so if you could just repeat that, that will make it easier to – to place.
Answer: Ah, yes. I was born as Isaac Klein. I’m still planning – trying to get the exact date. Was in contact with the relevant offices in Poland, and somebody who is doing research for it. Either in ’26, 1926 or 1927, May the 30th. About May the 30th, I am sure.
Q: And you were born in Sieradz?
A: Sieradz, yes.
Q: Right. So, if you could tell us in a – little bit about your – what your recollections from the pre-war time you – you lived in Sieradz, or you lived in Lódz?
A: No, I have lived in Sieradz. Two older brothers. That I – I may be – and the out – onset, I am the only one of the family left, there was a large family. But at the end of the war, there was no one left but I. I know that because we have decided that whoever survives wherever, our contact is people we know, distant relatives in Palestine – at that time Palestine, Erat Israel, and there was – no one appeared except myself. I learned about wit – what happened to the others here and there, through other people at one time witnessing.
Q: Could you describe little bit more th – you said that it was a large family, so –
A: Yes.
Q: – could you describe th – your family?
A: My grandmother, grandfather, it looked to me like my f-family have lived many generations in the city, but this probably is a child’s perception. Maybe it was the first generation; to me it was people who were settled there from who knows when, en antiquity. Where my grandfather, my grandmother had Alimarat(ph) and Hannah. Hannah who had seven sons. My father was the oldest, Shmuel(ph), and – and then there were still two daughters. So, nine children all together, then older, extended family, the spouses and my cousins. And I am aware of many other names, from letters, photographs, occasional visits from out of town.
Q: Well, d-do – do letters that you still have today, or those are the letters that you remember from the pre-war time?
A: No, I think too many times I was, like I had to undress and throw all my – whatever I had and start from the beginning with – with nothing from before. I have a picture of my family, it survived – it survived in someone’s hands in Palestine, and I think that I have it on me.
Q: Oh, oh, that’s great.
A: Myself, there were two brothers, much older, and I. They perished as partisans, and a book depicts what they were doing, a book which was published in New York, that was “From the Forest.”
Q: So where – where were they, as partisans? Wh-What region?
A: Originally – well, I just know that it was – they were in an area which was a – a part of Poland once, taken over by the – by the Russians. The Russians put them on a train, that’s what I learned from others, because they register to come back, the Russians considered this a risky element of people, because they want to go back to Germany. They wanted to go back to Germany to fetch my parents and I. But all that train was sent to Siberia. Would they have stayed, they would maybe survived. As it is they ran away from the train, into the forest, hiding from the Russians, starting to fight the Germans, even before the – officially the partisan organization was – was known, or whatever – ever ge – organized.
Q: So someone survived, who co –
A: One person su-survived, consider that, and he was later able to write about that, and that’s – that’s how I learned that my brothers didn’t die in – in the conditions I experienced, that they were fighting til the end. And this is the one [indecipherable] that I can accept.
Q: So what – what is your recollection of – what was – what was your father and your mother doing, what were they doing before the war?
A: My – my father was a – a merchant, and my mother was home. We – I think my parents had to be careful with money, those were the times, and it was very often coming up when I heard that they were worrying about tuition to – for me to continue education.
Q: Well, he was – your father was a merchant?
A: Yes.
Q: D-Do you recall what was he dealing in?
A: Oh, he dealt for the area, I think, the soap maida,(ph) cosmetics of maida(ph). At another – at another time, my grandparents had the wholesale grocery store, and for awhile my parents were running also a similar store on the same street. My brothers were – my oldest brother was in a hafshara(ph) in Rovno. And he was slated to go to – to Israel. Shell sided, lost his glasses in one of the battles and couldn’t see any more, was one of the first killed as a result.
Q: Oh. So, he was already in that area, in Volhynia, in Rovno before the war, so this was –
A: He – he – he – he – yes, he was. But in the meantime he came to Sieradz during the time they – th-the picture which I had was taken, this was the occasion. And when the war broke out, the family was together in Sieradz.
Q: Mm-hm, so your brothers as well?
