Key: EM - Edith Millman [interviewer] LW - Lillian Wishnefsky [interviewee] Interview Date: December 10, 1986 Tape 1, side 1:
EM: Mrs. Wishnefsky, can you tell me where you where born?
LW: I was born in Poland in a town called Sosnowiec in 1929, in December.
EM: Can you tell me something about your pre-war home life?
LW: From what I remember my pre-war home life was very good. My parents were very comfortable. I was an only child. My mother was a professional. She played the piano, and we owned a cigarette factory and my grandparents owned a stocking factory and my other grandparents owned a lumber yard, so I was raised what you would say as a wealthy child, which my parents were wealthy and I had a governess, and I was an only child. I didn’t go to a private school, I went to public school and I had a good education up to the fourth grade because the system in Poland was very good. Our educational system was advanced so whatever I learned up to fourth grade was pretty good, that's what I remember.
EM: What religious observances do you remember, if any?
LW: Well, my parents were Jewish, both my grandparents -- my one set of grandparents on my father's side was very religious. My parents were not very religious, but they kept holidays because in Europe out of respect for your elders people did everything to, you know, to please them and my mother and father followed all the holidays so I learned as much as I possibly could about Judaism and I had to go to synagogue and traditions were kept and Pesach and holidays we changed the dishes, and Yom Kippur I had to go to the synagogue for the holiday and Succos.
EM: You kept a kosher house?
LW: Yes. We kept a kosher house.
EM: Mrs. Wishnefsky, how old were you when the war broke out?
LW: I was 9 years old when the war broke out in September 4, 1939.
EM: Were you aware of any antisemitism before the war?
LW: Very little, very little, I was very young and I didn’t even -- I was not aware of it. The only time I was a little uncomfortable we had -- the school that I went to was more or less a Catholic type of a school because most of the Polish people were Catholics. I had to leave the class when they had religion and they had religion almost every day and we then had our own small group of Jewish children and had to go to another room to learn about Judaism. That is the only time I felt the difference, that I was different, but otherwise, I didn’t feel any antisemitism.
EM: When the war broke out how and when did it first involve your town?
LW: My town happens to be very close to the German border. When the war broke out -- I think a week later -- the Germans entered Sosnowiec. We really did not have too much time to think about it because before you turned around the Germans were right there in Sosnowiec. They took over instantly.
EM: Was a ghetto established in Sosnowiec?
LW: Yes, but not right away.
EM: When were you sent to a Ghetto and could you describe it?
LW: At first, the way they formed a ghetto was they made different families from different areas live in the neighborhood where I lived and they made Jewish families come over from Germany and they had to move in with families in Poland. So our apartment, which had maybe about four bedrooms and two bathrooms, had to accommodate a German family and then a Jewish family from Germany that was sent to Poland, and then my grandparents on my father's side had to leave home, whatever apartment that they were living at the time they had to come and live with us too, so we wound up living three families in one apartment. That was around 1941 or so.
EM: How about food and clothing and did your father still go to work?
LW: Well, the cigarette factory was confiscated by the Nazis and my father had to run it so my father had to work every day for the Germans and he ran the factory. At first, I didn’t feel the pinch about food or money because I was very young and I wasn’t even a big eater, so I really didn’t care about the food. But I know -- I found out later that my parents had money and jewelry and valuables that they traded in for food.
EM: Were you able to go to school?
LW: No, I could not go to public school any more. As soon as the Germans came in they made the Jewish people leave public schools. My father got a private tutor for me and there were several other Jewish children that were going to this man's house every day.
EM: Tell me more about this school, how many children to a teacher?
LW: We just had one teacher, this Jewish man was willing to teach us in his home which was considered illegal -- the Germans didn’t know, supposedly, that we were going to school somewhere and I was getting my education that way for a while. It was about eight of us.
EM: Do you remember any punishment for going to school -- if any of your friends were punished for going to these secret places?
LW: No, because nobody knew about it. And the next thing I know -- I think I went to school for about a year or so like that, maybe a little longer -- and the next thing I know I wasn't allowed to go to school any more and from what I understand the Germans found out about it and they closed the school. They made the man -- they wouldn't let him teach anybody any more and I don't know if they punished him or not. I wasn't punished. I just wasn't going any more.
EM: Could you tell me if the ghetto was surrounded by a wall, how was it separated from the rest of the town?
LW: Later on they made us move to another area -- that part of the city was the ghetto surrounded by a wall and they had guards outside of the wall.
EM: Did people still leave and go to work or did they have to work in the ghetto?
LW: No, I think most people still went out to work, if they were fortunate enough and they could still have something to do, but they had to be back within a certain time.
EM: Do you remember what kind of documents were distributed in the ghetto, any identification cards or cards for labor?
LW: Everybody had to wear the Jewish armband practically from the start when the Nazis came in. I think everybody had an identification card, and probably a labor card because as I said, I was so young but I don't remember but I think my father had a labor card and he had to go to work every day to run the factory that was once ours and he had to show his card every day.
EM: Were there any deportations from the ghetto?
LW: They started deportations from the ghetto gradually -- the whole thing was done very gradually, very quietly. People would talk about this one disappeared and they said he went to a labor camp and he didn't come back and next thing you heard someone else disappeared and went to a labor camp and didn’t come back. People really did not know enough about where these people were being sent to right away, this was a gradual thing. It's like they were doing it in a sneaky way telling the people, the Jewish people, that they were picking certain members of the families and sending them to labor camps and then they’ll come home.
EM: Were you aware of any special children actions where they would get children and send them away?
LW: Not right away. No, that didn’t happen till the end, from what I saw. I didn't see any children sent away till around the time I went to Auschwitz.
EM: How long were you in the ghetto in Sosnowiec?
LW: Maybe about a year and a half.
EM: Where did you go from there?
LW: Then we went to -- they made us move to another apartment which was in Srodula ghetto and there too we had to live with my grandparents on my father's side -- they lived with us but we didn't have an apartment there, there we had just one big room and it was about eight of us in one big room and that's how we had to live.
EM: How far was Srodula from Sosnowiec?
LW: It wasn't far -- it was like a suburb, you would say, the outskirts of Sosnowiec -- and Sosnowiec was maybe the fourth or fifth big city in Poland so it couldn't have been that large of a town and it wasn't that far away from Sosnowiec.
EM: Were the conditions worse in Srodula?
LW: Yes, the conditions were much worse in Srodula.
EM: Can you describe it a little bit?
LW: First of all, as I said, that eight of us had to sleep in one room. The beds were pushed together and then we put a sheet between beds because I had an aunt and uncle that were married and I had old grandparents and there wasn't any privacy and I had a single uncle who was about 28 years old and I was there with my father and there was another aunt and uncle that lived with us, so the conditions were not good, and it was hard to get food by then and my father didn’t go to work any more, they confiscated our factory and things were starting to get really bad.
EM: Where was your mother at the time?
LW: My mother went to another little town. She got false papers made for herself as a Christian and Christian families were hiding her. She went to Warsaw and she was going to send for me and for my father, later. She was getting papers ready to send for us and she had money and jewelry with her and that's how she survived in the Warsaw ghetto at the time, but she never had a chance to bring my father and me over to the Warsaw ghetto.
EM: Well, then she stayed in the Warsaw ghetto?
LW: Yes, she never came back -- she couldn't come back then. They wouldn't let her. She had to stay there in hiding.
EM: When and where were you sent from Srodula?
LW: From Srodula they made us move to another apartment in Srodula -- it was even a smaller place, smaller room. By that time my two aunts and uncles disappeared -- I think they were taken into a camp and I didn't even realize it -- what was happening, they were just gone. And we had to live in one little room in another little apartment with a strange family and I remember sleeping in bed with my father because there was no room and things were very, very bad then. That was the last apartment that I remember being in till we went into hiding.
EM: Could you tell me a little bit about the hiding, where you were hiding?
LW: Well, when we were in this little apartment the Nazis came in the middle of the night and took my father out -- [Mrs. Wishnefsky is crying] My grandmother got on her knees and she practically kissed the German's boots and pleaded with them: “Don't take my son, don’t take my son, take me, take me,” and I think I was just standing there and in shock because I really didn't know what was going on. I didn't understand. The full meaning didn't hit me because I was so young and, you know, I really had no idea what they were going to do to him, but I just had a feeling that I’ll never see him again and they wouldn't listen to my grandmother and they took my father with them and, naturally, I never saw him again.
EM: And you stayed in Srodula with your grandparents?
LW: Yes, I stayed there with my grandparents and they had a son who was my uncle who was deaf, who was a mute, so it was the four of us. And then the next thing I remember while we were there, the other family and my grandparents made a hideout -- a cellar underneath the cellar. They made it with boards, I think, where you didn't even know when you went down the cellar that there was another entrance. We were hiding there for quite a while and there was another family there -- I think it was a Rabbi and his wife. They were an older couple and there was a child there besides. And every night my grandfather used to go outside and scrounge around for some food, wherever he could get food, and this lasted for a few weeks. The next thing I remember, it was broad daylight so I guess it had to be in the morning sometime, the Nazis found us. They had German police dogs and the Polish people helped them find us because the Polish people knew that we were hiding. And they opened up the trap door to the basement, to the hiding place, and they dragged us out and lined us up in the middle of the yard and they dragged the Rabbi by the beard and made him chant in Hebrew. [crying] And they shot my grandparents and they shot my uncle and they shoved me on the wagon and sent me to another -- like a ghetto, but it was not a ghetto it was just -- looked like a great big yard with a couple of houses with barbed wires and bars on the windows and we just stayed there for a while.
EM: With whom did you stay there, did you say that they shot your grandparents?
LW: They shot my grandparents.
EM: Were you there with other children? You were saying they took you to a yard --
LW: Yes, a little camp. Yes, it was a yard with houses -- not houses, it was like a prison. There wasn't any beds inside or anything. There was a bare cement floor and we just sat there and waited for our fate. And from there -- we were there for a few weeks, I guess they threw us food, whatever it was. From there they sent us to Auschwitz in cattle trains. [Mrs. Wishnefsky is crying.]
EM: Can you describe it a little bit?
LW: Yes, I can describe it. We got on the cattle trains and people were screaming and carrying on and some people jumped off the train and we had to stay on the train, I think it was a couple of days because I don't remember how long a ride it was, and we just had to stay there and if anybody had to go to the bathroom they just had to go in the train. Some people passed out. And that was the ride to Auschwitz and the Nazis were on the train with machine guns and watched us. When we got off in Auschwitz I remember seeing those gates and bleak barracks and they lined us up outside and they formed lines -- some people went to the left and some people went to the right -- the ones to the left probably went to the gas chambers immediately and the ones to the right, they sent us to the labor camp and I was one of them -- I was one of the lucky ones that they sent to the camp.
EM: How old were you at that time? that was when?
LW: I was about 12 ½.
EM: Can you tell me, were you with other children in the camp or were you with adults?
LW: I was with adults. There wasn't any children in my camp. I was one of the youngest children in my camp. From what I understand, they had a camp for children, a special one. They did not send me there even though I was 12 years old I looked younger. I was little and skinny. I did not look my age but for some reason they did not send me to the children's camp. From what I understand later on the children's camp was totally destroyed and the children all died. They just sent me to the labor camp as if I were older.
EM: Did you have to join a labor battalion or what kind of work did you have to do, it any?
LW: I had to do all kinds of work. I had to dig ditches and I had to walk in all kinds of cold weather with wooden “clod hopper shoes” that we had to wear in the prison uniforms from about five-six o'clock in the morning and carry bricks from one spot to another. We had to dig ditches. I worked in an ammunition factory making bullets and I worked in another factory where we sewed patches and buttons for solders' uniforms.
EM: Do you recall if you were sick in the camp, did you receive any kind of medical treatment?
LW: I was sick in the camp. I didn’t receive any medical treatment because my illness was a kidney disease that I had before I entered the camp -- I had nephrosis or nephritis -- I used to swell up all the time and I had to be on a special diet before the war and I had to get a lot of rest; I was a sickly child. So in the camp, since I had to be on a special diet since they didn't feed me very much, it actually helped my diet, but I was very weak, very tired.
EM: How long were you in Auschwitz?
LW: From the time I was 12 ½ till I was 14 or so, a little past 14?
EM: During that time were you aware of any underground movement?
LW: No, I was so young, I didn't realize that that was going on.
EM: Do you know of anybody who escaped?
LW: Yes, I had a cousin who escaped, but I don't know how he escaped, Leon. I think he was in Auschwitz. He lives in Oklahoma now. He escaped Auschwitz and he paraded as a German soldier. I don’t know how he got out.
EM: Did you know that he was in Auschwitz at the same time?
LW: No, we were all separated.
EM: Did you have contact with any of your friends or some relatives?
LW: One, she was my mother's best girlfriend. Her name was Andzia Spiegelman. She was with me in the camp most of the time. She used to share -- every time she got a piece of bread or extra food she used to share it with me because her husband was in the men's camp and sometimes he could smuggle some food over to her, so whenever she had something whenever I was with her she shared it with me.
EM: That’s beautiful. Where were you sent from Auschwitz?
LW: From Auschwitz they sent me to a camp called Ravensbrück. We had this march. We had to march in snow and ice and sleet from Auschwitz for a couple of days and then we got on a cattle train and they took us to Ravensbrück because this was in 1944 and the Russians were coming close to Auschwitz so the Germans sent us into Germany and that’s when I went to Ravensbrück.
EM: So first you had to march?
LW: First we had to march and then they put us in cattle trains.
EM: Could you describe Ravensbrück or what happened when you arrived there?
LW: Well, we arrived there, I remember the first day when we arrived there, we had to sleep on the ground because they didn't know where to put us because it was a transport from Auschwitz they probably didn't expect it -- maybe they just weren't ready to receive prisoners from another camp and they made us sleep on the ground for a couple of nights and it was winter, it was cold and freezing and then they assigned us to barracks. The barracks were very similar to what Auschwitz was like and they sent us out in the fields to dig ditches again and do all kinds of labor, outdoor labor in Ravensbrück. I did not do any indoor labor there at all. They also had gas chambers in Ravensbrück and they sent us to take showers quite often and we were always worried that the showers would wind up being gas.
EM: Did you know about the showers being gas?
LW: I knew about it in Auschwitz once I got there because they made us take showers every few days, get undressed and give them our uniforms that we wore; we wore stripped uniforms. I don't know if they gave us back the same ones or new ones, they all looked dirty, they all looked the same but they used to make us get undressed and we never knew if we get into the shower if it would be water or if it would be gas. So we knew about the gas. My barrack was right across the street from the gas chamber and I saw the smoke every day. I saw the trains coming in with people, all the time and I heard the screaming of the people dying every day.
EM: Mrs. Wishnefsky is crying so we will proceed slowly.
LW: Okay.
EM: In Ravensbrück can you say there were also gas chambers?
LW: Yes, they had gas chambers in Ravensbrück, but they didn’t send us for body inspections as often as they did in Auschwitz because I think they knew that the war was almost over and maybe Hitler was getting a little panicky and getting a little negligent about examining us. But we also knew that if the war would be over, everybody would die first because he didn’t want any survivors. We knew that.
EM: What do you mean by body inspection?
LW: Body inspection, I mean, they used to make us get undressed all the time and line us up. It happened many two-three times a week and anybody that had any deterioration marks on their bodies from starvation would go to the gas chamber. If anybody had a blemish on their body -- and starvation will do that. You can get blotches all over your body or swell up from starvation; those people went right to the gas chamber.
EM: Who was doing the inspecting?
LW: German officers.
EM: You stayed in Ravensbrück till what time?
LW: Till March of 1945.
EM: And then you were liberated?
LW: No, I was an exchange of prisoners. I was sent to Sweden before the war was over. President Roosevelt made a pact with Hitler to exchange 200 German soldiers for some prisoners from Ravensbrück and they took 200 prisoners from Ravensbrück and sent us to Sweden. I was one of the exchange prisoners.
EM: How did they select the people?
LW: I don't know how they selected, but one time in the middle of the night, I was laying in my barrack and they called out my number -- we all had numbers, we were not names -- and they called out my number and they said, “Line up outside;” they never told you anything, I thought this was it, this is the end, I’m going to die now. So I stood outside and a whole bunch of people came from different barracks and they lined us up like soldiers and they marched us over to another barrack, an empty one, and they made us sit there on the ground, a cement floor and nothing else. And we just sat there for a day or so, we didn't know what was happening. And next thing I know -- we thought we were going to die, that from there we’re going to the gas chamber -- and the next thing I know they came in, like two days later or so, I think I lost track of time through this whole thing. They brought us food, a package of food, everybody got a care package of Red Cross food and I thought to myself that they’re going to feed us now so we could go to the gas chamber not realizing what was happening. So I opened my package and I ate because I thought if I am going to die let me eat a piece of chocolate first , and then they made us walk out the gate. As we were walking out the gate -- we had our numbers sewn on our uniforms besides the ones that we had tattooed, it was the same number sewn on the outside of our sleeve-- they ripped the numbers off, I'll never forget that, and everybody walked out the gate with a package of food and the numbers were ripped off. So I thought for sure this is it, I’ll be going to the gas chamber and they had Red Cross trucks outside, Danish Red Cross trucks, and they told us to get on the trucks. So a lot of women started to scream and they wouldn't get on the trucks, they said it’s a trick, it’s a trick we’re going to the gas chambers. But I got on the truck and I ate my chocolates or whatever I could lay my hands on in my package and the truck drivers kept saying, “Don't be upset, everything is good, everything is fine, you're leaving the camp, you're going to Denmark, you're free, you're free.” And a lot women didn't believe it and they jumped out the windows and they died and some of them just carried on, and they went crazy.
EM: You say you were on the truck, were there only women there?
LW: Only women, my transport, the people that were freed from my camp at that time were only women. I think later they freed some men too, but not at the same time I was freed. I was in an exchange, as I said of about 200 Jewish prisoners in exchange for 200 German prisoners. I was chosen to be one of the exchange prisoners and I don't know why.
EM: Where did the trucks take you?
LW: They took us to Denmark and then they made us get off the trucks in Denmark. They had like tents set up in the fields, they let us get washed there and they had tables set up with hot food and they fed us and we slept in the tents that night and the next day we got on a ship and we went to Sweden.
EM: Were there still Nazis in Denmark at that time?
LW: No, I didn't see any Nazis because we were in the fields where they set the tents up for the prisoners and they immediately the next morning shipped us -- they took us over to the ship, they took us to Sweden. I didn't see any Nazis in Denmark. The Danish Red Cross really helped us.
EM: So you were only there for two days.
LW: That’s all.
EM: And then you went to Sweden?
LW: Yes.
EM: Could you describe your arrival in Sweden?
LW: Yes, when we got to Sweden they immediately took us to a place where they disinfected us. They took all our clothes away and they told us to take showers and I think I was frightened of showers again because I had enough showers in the camps. But they explained to me that this was a regular shower, don't be afraid. And they literally scrubbed our bodies to try to get the filth off and they gave us clean underwear and fresh clothing, something to wear, you know, and then they sent us to...
Tape 1, side 2:
EM: Can you tell me more about the reception you had in Sweden?
LW: The reception I had in Sweden was wonderful. They were very kind to us.
EM: Were you in a camp or did they send you to private homes?
LW: Well, first I was in a hospital under quarantine for about six weeks. They fed us certain kinds of foods to build up our bodies because we were all full of malnutrition and everybody was sick then, you know skinny, and I don't think anybody was too healthy. So they built us up, and then after that, they treated us well but we weren’t allowed to go off the grounds. We had to stay there because some people came down with tuberculosis and they had to be watched and sent to hospitals and be separated from everybody else because that was contagious. One of my girlfriends came down with tuberculosis and I shared a bunk with her in Auschwitz and in Ravensbrück and she wound up with tuberculosis, contagious, and they had to send her away.
EM: Was she about your age?
LW: She was about a year or so older.
EM: Did you know her before the war or did you get friendly in the camp?
LW: No, we met in the camp. There were three of us that stayed together and this one girl had tuberculosis and she remained in the tuberculosis sanitorium.
EM: So three of you were sent to Sweden together?
LW: Yes, we were.
EM: Where did you go from the hospital?
LW: From the hospital they sent us to a farm.
EM: You were saying -- from the hospital you were sent...
LW: From the hospital they sent me to a farm with several other of the survivors, to a town called Sulberga. They sent us to a farm -- not quarantined as much as so we should be rehabilitated and we stayed on this farm in a town called Sulberga.
EM: Can you spell it, do you know how?
LW: Yes, Sulberga.
EM: Was it a large town?
LW: It wasn't a large town. It was a farm town. It didn't have too many houses. It seemed to be mainly farmland, but we didn't go anywhere we just stayed on the farm.
EM: How many people were sent to this farm?
LW: Maybe 25 or 30 the most.
EM: Did you have to do any work there?
LW: No, no work. We just ate and slept and read and laid out in the sun and we talked. We didn't do anything.
EM: How long did you stay on the farm?
LW: I was there for about four months and the rest of the time I spent in Stockholm. I was in Stockholm for five months.
EM: Did you know anybody in Stockholm?
LW: Well, I met this lady in Stockholm because I wrote a diary in Sulberga; I was writing about my life; I was writing a diary to my mother. And one of the girls, she was also a survivor, found my diary and she read it and she liked it and she sent it to Sweden to a publishing company. They must have read the diary and I didn’t know it disappeared and I couldn’t find it, I didn’t know what happened to it and the next thing I know a representative came from Stockholm to take me back to Stockholm that they liked my diary and they wanted to translate it into Swedish. So I moved to Stockholm to live with this lady who was going to translate the diary into Swedish and I stayed with her.
EM: What language did you write it in?
LW: I wrote it in Polish and then when I went to Sweden I lived with this lady and she was very nice to me.
EM: You mean the one in Stockholm?
LW: Yes, I went to Stockholm, I’m sorry.
EM: And how long did you stay in Stockholm?
LW: I only stayed there five months because I had a relative that brought me over to America and so I came here.
EM: How did this relative find you?
LW: Well, they had a newspaper, I think, that went over to America -- they asked me do I have any relatives anywhere, did I want to go anywhere after the war, you know when the war was over and it was by then. I knew I had an aunt that lived here in Norristown, but I didn’t know she lived in Norristown, I thought she still lived in New York at the time, so I said I'd like to go live with my aunt because I knew my parents weren't alive any more.
EM: Did you try to find out about them?
LW: I found out from a couple of people in the camp that my father was gone.
EM: In which camp?
LW: In Auschwitz, I knew in Auschwitz already, maybe it was Ravensbrück, I think it was Ravensbrück; I found out that my father was gone and that my mother died in the Warsaw ghetto so I didn't want to go back to Poland. I had nobody there and I never wanted to go back to Poland again.
EM: So do you know if a Jewish organization contacted your aunt?
LW: Yes, the HIAS found my aunt. She was living in Norristown at the time and a friend of hers that knew her from New York read her name in the paper and read that a niece of hers was alive and she was looking for her. So my aunt found out where I was through the HIAS and wrote to me in Sweden and then five months later she brought me over to America.
EM: Was this your father's sister or your mother's sister?
LW: My mother's sister, yes.
EM: So you arrived, you came to Norristown?
LW: Yes, I came here and I went to Norristown to stay with my aunt.
EM: Did you start work or did you go back to school?
LW: I moved to Philadelphia, I moved to a foster home. I didn't stay with my aunt and I went to school right away, I didn't go to work. I was only sixteen and I wanted to go to school, to learn how to speak English.
EM: You speak very well.
LW: Thank you.
EM: So you stayed in Philadelphia and you went to school and you stayed in a foster home...
LW: I lived in foster homes.
EM: Was it Jewish homes?
LW: Yes, it was all Jewish homes, where the Association for Jewish Children placed me in different homes.
EM: Could you tell me when you got married?
LW: I got married in 1948, in November.
EM: And you married an American?
LW: Yes, I married an American boy.
EM: Now with your aunt and the people in the foster homes, did you speak English or Yiddish or Polish?
LW: When I first came here I spoke Polish to my aunt. She wouldn’t let me speak Polish, she only wanted me to speak English and even though I couldn't speak one word of it, she forced me to speak English and it was difficult. So the first four months I don't think I said one word in English, but after that I started speaking fluent English and while I was going to school I learned it and all of a sudden I couldn't speak Polish any more, my throat would close up on me. Something happened to my mind, I just could not speak the language.
EM: Does this still continue?
LW: I cannot speak Polish. I understand some of it, but it sounds like a foreign language. But this happened to me almost immediately.
EM: So, you say you got married in 1948? to an American?
LW: Yes.
EM: You have two children.
LW: I have two children and two grandchildren.
EM: You're very lucky.
LW: Thank you. Yes I am.
EM: Thank you very much, Mrs. Wishnefsky. Is there anything you would like to add?
LW: (long pause) The only thing I would like to add is that I hope this tape will help future generations from being aware of what happened and they should try to prevent anything like this happening again to our children, our grandchildren or anybody because it was the most horrible, indescribeable thing that is so difficult to talk about because when I first came here I couldn't talk about it and when I did try I saw people's faces and they looked at me as if I was a either a freak of some sort or crazy, so I thought it is better not to talk about it because they wouldn't believe me anyway. So believe me it happened and don't let it happen again. That's all I could say. [Mrs. Wishnefsky is crying.]
EM: Thank you very much. You were extremely helpful.
LW: Thank you.
