Interview with Sarah Loewy
May 1st, 1997
Q: This is tape one of an United States Holocaust Memorial Museum Interview with Mrs. Sarah Loewy conducted by Christian Kloesch, on May 1st, 1997 in Queens, New York.
Let us start the interview with the most basic facts. Could you please tell me your name at birth, when and where you were born?
A: When, April 2, 1910.
Q: And where were you born?
A: I was born in Poland, Galicia really, war unter Kaiser Franz Josef und meine Eltern meinten 14 we were walked away to Steiermark, in the Hintergrund, because the front war in Galizien. First the Pollaken came in, I heard, I do not remember anything from there, and I only remember three or four days, we were going from one car in the other and underneath to they, because there was shooting all over us. And we didn’t have to eat and we were crying, we were kids. My mother had six kids and nice, and even a maid with her she told, next day she comes back. My father stayed with my grandmother and he was hid from the Russians and from the Pollacken and then the German came in and it was a real fight. And then after years, we finally came to Graz. We were first in Stainz, I remember. In a, how do call, where the cows were next door, a Stall. Und we were there for quiet a few days and finally we came to Graz. When my father came back we went to Graz and we lived first in der Keplerstrasse. And then we moved near the temple. My father were Orthodox, my parents, we had an Orthodox home and we moved closer to our synagogue on Grieskai. And we lived first Griesplatz 28, and that was very, we lived a nice sheltered life, because even then all around us was Antisemitism. They weren’t against us personally, but I remember when my mother used to cook or buy me a new dress, I had to wear an old cot over, because she was afraid the people not to show them, that we could have it. Not that we could afford, but we. And I remember the whole that time 1916, 1918, we had about four room apartment. And the whole house was full with soldiers, whoever was a Jewish soldier, the police sent him to us, because the knew, my parents will let them in. My mother were used to cook for them, because we had nothing, so they brought us food. And my mother cooked for them and the whole house was full. And there was an incident. My uncle was in Vienna and they came to visit us and they could not find us. We all were sitting in the last room, the kids alone, because the parents were busy always with the soldiers.
Q: Why were there so many soldiers in Graz?
A: They came from, I remember many good looking boys from Russia, from Poland, from Galicia and then couple days latter we went to visit them in the hospitals without legs, without arms. They were from the front, they came back and it was very, very sad. And then came the revolution 1918, I remember. We were standing at 12, 1 o’ clock at night all five children. My sister was not born, she was born 1920. And we were the five and my cousin, who stayed with us, she couldn’t go back to her mother, she didn’t, because she couldn’t go back to Galicia. And she stayed with us and we were standing 11, 12, 1 o’clock at night for a quarter of bred, for the week. And we were hiding at, because we had to watch it for the whole week, or the sugar we didn’t have only we got Malzbonbons, and that was our sugar. And till today I can’t stand Magerine, because we fad frozen oil, instead of butter in the revolution, and one time we really did not have any to eat and my brother, it was a holiday and he went to the synagogue and he but in a little note, there were the torahs are, and somebody, „please god help us we are starving for hunger. “ And somebody seen it and the next day we had sacks with potatoes, and the the first time I got peanuts. A man brought a sack of roasted peanuts. It was really, I think I was already a big girl when the first time I ate a piece of punchcake, I didn’t know really what it was. It was really tough.
Q: Could we go back to Galicia, for a moment. Can you remember the town, where you were born?
A: I was four years old. I remember only one thing, we had a attic and I felt down, it was like a trapdoor and I fell down, that is the only thing, I either remember my grandmother I have never seen her.
Q: And the family of your father, they lived in this town?
A: The family of my father were all together in different parts of Galicia.
Q: Can you remember the town were your father was born?
A: Only name, Brody, only the name. It was closer to the Russian border.
Q: And your mother?
A: My mother was in Legiantz(ph), near Pschemysl (ph), you know the Landshut, she lived there. How they met, I don’t know. Only one uncle I knew, he came, he was evacuated to Vienna, he was in Vienna, I don’t know of the same time or when this, I don’t know.
Q: Could you tell me the name of your father and the name of your mother?
A: My fathers name was Samuel Burstin, my mothers name Regina Burstin, geborene Veit.
Q: And so your name was Sarah Burstin?
A: I peg your pardon?
Q: Your name was Sarah Burstin.
A: Were Burtsin, ja, I born Burstin, we were all, all the children. Only my oldest brother, Jacob, he had, he wanted to go one day to Hungary, we were declared staatenlos, Austria didn’t wanna take us, Galicia we didn’t have any more, Poland didn’t wanna take us either. We were without any papers. But one day my brother it was about 1935, 34, 36, something like this, he wanted to go to, he had trouble with his knees, to Plattensee nach Hungary and he got a Polish passport. And the name all of a sudden, they found out in the government or wherever, that my grandparents weren’t married by court only by religious married. So his passport was on Rottenberg, my mothers, my fathers, my grandmothers name from fathers side her name was Rottenberg, Kittel(ph,) Rottenberg. And his passport was under Rottenberg, that’s why my brother from Israel, he send people from Palestine to save them couldn’t find them, they looked for Burstin and nobody knew Burstin there only Rottenberg . And he got killed there by Hitler, but married I heard. I have the last card from him, were he wrote on Pearl Harbor-Day, came the card. I used to send him whatever I had here, tried to work whatever I could make. I turned over dirty shirts to colors and I got ten cents per shirt and I saved it up. And we send it, I sent him from the post office international stamp a lot of them. And with that, he kept himself going. And on Pearl Harbor, he writes, „Don’t send anything, anymore, save it. If I need something, I know you will give me. “ And that was all. I have never heard anything from him, I have never seen him.
Q: ...This letter came from Poland....
A: And I blame the United States of America. He had five Affidavits, he had to wait for the quota. They were afraid, he will kill somebody around here. He was one of the nicest, he was the best brother. He made all five of us beautiful. When he got his first money, he brought it to mother. My mother, he only wanted pocket-money and like this, we all children, whatever we made, we gave it to the parents. And it was a beautiful, beautiful home.
Q: What was the name of your brother again?
A: Jacob. Abraham Jacob.
Q: What was the profession of your father?
A: My father in Galicia, he had a bank, he was director of a bank, and a wholesale grocery, a wholesale import and export, I think import and export, import probably. Stuff. Some of the stuff came to Graz, I remember, soap and rice, the first few days. And then nothing came. And then, he didn’t, he was very religious, he didn’t want to store, because you had to keep it open on Saturday and holiday, so became a Wallstreet-man. In fact he was five of the week in Vienna, because their was the Boerse. And then for the weekend and the holiday, he came home. And I remember there was one Bank Krentschmor and Johann. They still exists?
Q: They still exists, JA?
A: You should have gone in. I have a picture of my father where he is sitting and reading the Wallstreet paper, the Boerse, and he said: „Why do you take a picture of me? “ He brought that picture home, and I said: „Father, from where you got it? “ And he said: „From Krentschmer Bank. “ They took the picture and they said: „You are the only one we are gonna save, because we never seen a human being like you. “ He was really, he had eyes that people on the street lifted the had from strangers. He was the most, and he want us pack together, he got cancer, he died 1935. But he said: „Pack together, get from here. There is a devil in Germany and he will get you all. “
Q: So you father stayed in Vienna. .
A: For a few days always, he lived in Graz and always came home.
Q: So why did your family....
A: didn’t go to Vienna? We all went to school already. And to up was Vienna different, to upset everything. And somehow, we were not used to runt, probably my parents. And then you know, we had a base, you know, we went all to school, we were in the sport, we were in the synagogue, we felt really home. And he never forced us, in matter of fact, he bought a house sometime, when he the Boerse made some money and still, my mother went many times their, I was many times in Vienna, everybody we were in Vienna. We went forth and back, it was a trip, not like here, but for there, we packed and...But they never really, I don’t know why really.
Q: You told me, that your family came to Graz in 1914. Were you supported by the Jewish Kultusgemeinde in Graz?
A: No, no.
Q: So you were on your on.
A: Always on our on. Same here, I came here, we came here from Schweden. We had 500 Dollars, they gave us, because we had visas to go to Paraguay and they gave us 500 Dollars Landungsgeld. But we couldn’t go there. We went to my uncle, I had Affidavit and waited for the visa to give us. And America, when Hitler marched in to Poland on September 1, we got the Visas. They called us finally and we were supposed to go to Holland, we had tickets to Holland but the man said: „Don’t go to. “ We went to Goeteborg and from Goeteborg we got the ship to, the Kingsholm(ph) to America. We came here, there was a telegram from my mother in law. She was in Vienna, she could save herself to go to Manila. Their daughter and son was their already to Manila, Philippine Islands. So we took 300 Dollars, my husband took the 300 Dollars and paid, bought her the ticket and sent it and saved her, thank god. And we was here with 100 Dollars we bought a bedroom, the krip, and I had a Dollar a day for weeks and weeks to spent. And I tried whatever worked. They seen my clothes who made it. Their was a one very nice lady: „Who made it“ I said: „I made it myself. “ I went to the Hohere Toechterschule in Graz am Entenplatz. And I was a pretty good dressmaker their. And she seen my clothes: „Make me a skirt for my daughter“ I said: „I gladly, but I have no machine. “ „I give you my machine, I just bought it. I am going up to the Catshills for three month. “ I said: „You don’t know me. “ She said: „You will go back to Hitler. “ So naturally I made her the skirt for nothing and bought her a big beautiful bouquet of flowers and gave her back the machine. And that time I saved up my first 16 Dollars, beside for the household. My husband was a lawyer, he wasn’t very well, he was hit many times, he was arrested many times, he was tight down to a tree to be shot, so he had, he came here with a heart murmur. And my uncle, gave him, find him a job, first he was, here, out in Flushing for how do you call it? For dyeing, a dyeing factory, a dye, and he was sitting on the floor and straighten out the material, that should be straight. And I could see what color. He came home red oder green or yellow or blue. And few month later, he got a job as a presser in a factory. There he got became a little better, he made a few Dollars and we were be able to life a little lighter. And I had a son from three years and we worked, but I never went to any organization or any welfare, or any, I only gave, I never took till today, thank god, I give but I don’t take.
Q: So weren’t supported by the HIAS
A: For nobody. I only called once the HIAS or the Jewish Congress it was, I don’t know, one of them. Und I asked them for work and they sent me the American flag, I still have it somewhere, and a krip for the kid. And that’s was one, for the first and the last time, I talked with anybody about giving. And even my uncle, he was wonderful, every morning he came with milk and rolls and I managed, I put a good manager, I put a good cook, I put a good household and I always had guest, who ever came from Graz, came to my house to eat. That you made and that you make, they thought I am swimming in money. But it was...And then it was very cheap. You got three pounds of apple for ten cents then. And was everything, I never took anything from anyone, thank god.
Q: Could you tell me a little bit about the situation in Graz during the W.W.I and afterwards?
A: When. I remember March, it was March 1938. We opened the radio and we heard the Horst Wessel Lied and we knew now what is coming. And I lived in Kinggasse and my son was about a year and a half. He was born in 36. He was about not even two years old and I had a beautiful apartment. He had a nice job and next day he was arrested. He and all they other, he was president of the Hakoah. Und the thought, god knows, how much money and how many guns and weapons they looked through the house were the guns are. And I never touched one, I never seen one, I mean they don’t know, the same my whole family. So he was arrested and he was there about five or six days and I went there then to the Paulustor. And in the lions tent I went in, and all the big shots were there, all the Nazis: „He is in besten Haenden. Don’t worry. “ I said: „No, I do worry I want him home. “
Q: Can you remember some of the names of this Nazis?
A: Of the Nazis? No. I only know mit whom he was arrested their. Herr Dr. Spiegel, Herr Direktor Spiegel, der Otto Loewi, der Nobelpreistraeger. In bester company, they told me. But I said: „I want him home. “ And I didn’t get out from there until they promised me he will came home tonight. I said: „You promise, that’s all. Will you keep you promise? “ He said: „Kruzifix noch einmal. Ja, ich schick ihm nach Haus. “ Und am evening, he came full mit Laeuse, and blue and black and hid and kicked. And he came home and he stayed home till we got the. . And then my father in law was very sick already on his death bed. He had those store in der Annenstrasse 50. And they wanted us to move in with them on the first floor we lived, on the groundfloor was the Sturmtruppe. And next door my neighbor, I didn’t know it, I went him, I seen life size picture of Hitler. So I knew where he was. But the way the boy are downstairs, I couldn’t say a bad word of them. They took the curtsch(ph) upstairs, they opened the door, they „Kuess die Hand gnaedige Frau. “ I don’t know, if the knew I was Jewish. They always thought I am Italien. I used to be always braun and block hair. So they were very cordial. I really couldn’t say anything. They kept the door open, the individual wasn’t bad, but the they were drugged or drunk or they thought, you were like... My brother had a nice store in the Neutorgasse, a fish store, and the man, who washed the floor, disappeared for a couple of months. Then he came back and he said: „You Jew, get out of here. You stink. I am taking over. “ So he took over the store. Naturally after two, three weeks he had to close, he had no idea. He thought money goes in and. And. That was of my brother, he had to get out and he tried to go away and he has been to Holland. And their he gave English lessons. He was a very intelligent man. He spoke quiet a few languages.
Q: What’s the name of this brother?
A: David. And he was a very intelligent. He got to that store, he finished Abiturientenkurs als ein accountant. And he got that store, that was a fish store, and for three days a week. After a couple of month, he had to go in every week and after a couple of years, they took him in as a partner. He made that store blooming, he took from the Nordsee. And then he made a baking out. He finished an oven with three big tanks of oil and baking out, he fried it. There was a line around the block, at holidays a line. And everyday one brother, who was from Israel, he was came a visit, he worked there too in as a cashier and whoever beggar came in, he got fish for nothing. And when he left again for Israel, for Palestine then, the beggars came: „Why did he let him go. He gave us fish. “ So my brother said: „You can still come. You get the fish, anytime for nothing. “ And it was a big store, and it got stuff from Japan and von der Nordsee, from Holland, from Belgium, from all over. And that man thought, he could just sit on the desk and that’s it. Because one brother, his name was Issy, was sitting in Salzburg. And the merchandise came to Salzburg, and he sended all around Steiermark and Oesterreich the fish. It was a very big business.
Q: Can you remember the name of this store?
A: Wurmfeld. You remember it?
Q: No, It was in the Neubaugasse?
A: Neutorgasse, right bei der Bruecke. Ja, In der Neutorgasse. He lived there then my brother, because Mr. Wurmfeld, he lived somewhere else and his sister came then, and she lived in Hungary, Ms. Lefkowitsch. And he were the owner, and he were the owner, fifty-fifty. But he never got anything from it back. Never. Really, I am jumping from one to the other.
Q: That is no problem.
A: And Graz it was awful. Every minute more flags from every window, there was flags hanging. Everybody was afraid, they pulled out a flag, they Anti-Hitler. All day long nur music and playing. And my son, looked very blond and very blue eyes. And he was a year and a half and very cute and charming, he was marching with the music. And the others the Sozialdemokraten, in the Annenstrasse was the office from the SS and three officers came out there, German officers, and they seen the little kid walking and one came and picked him up. So I was standing there and waiting then I said: „Bitte give me the child. “ The man said: „Tell you mother, you are growing up in a German Reich. “ Because I told him „Mach schoen den Diener. “ They liked the children: „You are growing up in a German Reich and hier wir mit Heil Hitler gegruesst. “ So took the child quick and I walked home. But he seems, he had his one child, probably, and he was away from home. And he was blond and blue eyed, like a real German boy.
Q: This was shortly after the Anschluss?
A: That’s nach dem Anschluss. Then the Anschluss, you know really, my brother in Israel got married and my mother weren’t there. So she told my brother: “David, give me money. I will buy ground there, or a house, or whatever. “ „No Schuschnigg, Dollfuss are here, nothing will come out. “ And I remember Dollfuss came to Graz und die Frontkaempfer, die Grazer Frontkamepfer war mit Dollfuss and there was in the Opernhaus „Reich mir die Hand Kamerad. “ And we were invited, my husband and I were invited to the opera. And it was a big, big show, and they all thought Hitler wouldn’t succeeds.
Q: When was that?
A: This was in 38 still. It was about in May, June something 38.
Q: This rehearsal in the opera, was after the Anschluss or before?
A: The Anschluss, I don’t what the Anschluss was really. I only was when Hitler was already marched to Graz. But I Don’t know when the Anschluss was, after they killed Schuschnigg oder Dollfuss.
Q: No, the Anschluss was in March 11, 38.
A: 38. Das was nach dem Anschluss, but Vienna was still Austria. It was, I don’t know what it was really, but there they still was free, we were still, we thought Dollfuss will make it or Schuschnigg will make it. And there was departed, it was in May or June.
Q: 38?
A. 38.
Q: You and your husband were invited to the opera.
A: Were invited, ja. He was very well known my husband he was president from the Hakoah and in fact one time he had a fight in the paper. But I Can’t remember the name of the Zeitung.
Q: Was it a Styrian newspaper?
A: Not the Tagesblatt, the other one.
Q: Kleine Zeitung.
A: Nicht die Kleine, no. Volksblatt. Das Volksblatt and his name, I think Stirner oder something. I can’t remember.
Side B
A: ....was supposed to go down from the first league to the second league. And there was a fight and one the Strassenberger club was playing against the Hakoah and somehow the shut always about not in the goal but above the goal and the Hakoah won that game and Hakoah remained in the first league. And that man was writing in the Volksblatt that the won it on the green table and my husband wrote it back. And that was in the paper too. And for a couple of days it was going forth and the were the best of friend and it was a big think. And the Hakoah remained in the first league.
Q: This was soccer, soccer.
A: Soccer, ja. We had a club their we had Tennis, we had Ping Pong, we had everything. There was a rally nice...And all the Jewish kids were together, but once the GAK, they were always against us. All antisemitic. And my brother had three brothers in the Hakoah playing in the first league. One was in the, two of them half, Stuermer, and one, the little one, he was little, was very agile, he was even in the Auswahlmannschaft from Steiermark playing. There were very good player. And we were very, very liked. In fact, I am jumping again, an incident, we came, my brother from Uruguay, Issi, lived in Uruguay. And he came with his wife, she was Viennese, to Vienna. And my husband and I, 1960 we made a going to see my mother in Israel, and my brother, I didn’t see them all this years, we went to Israel. And going back we went to Vienna and then to Graz. And then in Vienna I met my brother and sister in law. And we were sitting on the train going to Graz. A man was sitting in the next comparmentand he didn’t leave his eye from us. I said to my husband and to my brother: „If I wouldn’t have the American passport, I wouldn’t feel that easy. “ And in Muerzzuschlag, he finally came over and he said: „You are Herr Burstin. “ He said: „Yes. “ .....My brother said: „You are young, how did you know? “ „I only came every Sunday to watch you playing football. “ And in 1960 we came to Graz and twelve o clock at night we took a taxi zum Erzherzog Johann, to the hotel. The taxi driver turned around: „Herr Doktor Loewy, was sie hier. “
Q: Ja. He recognized him.
A: He was so well known. He even didn’t want the carfare, so my husband said: No, no are you verrueckt. We pay you. “ He wanted, so in the Erzherzog Johann we were like the monkeys in the cage. In the morning, everyone went around to look at us. How? What? Where? When? It was, like I said, individual, I personally, I didn’t feel it. Whenever I went in to tramway, they stand up for me to give me the seat, even when I was young. But my husband was quiet a few times arrested, when anybody made anything wrong, they came to him and he was arrested. Every time I had to go, I went even once to Rintelen, he was like the
Q: I think he was the Gau. .
A: ...like the governor from Graz, something. And I went to him and told: „You were the teacher of my husband. You know what kind of man he is. Why is he arrested? Only because he is a Jew? “ So he said: „Go home, he will come home tonight. “ And I always belt him out with words only. I was not afraid to go. And, but in the Kristallnacht it was the worst.
Q: Could you tell me a little bit about the...
A: From the Kristallnacht? It was the worst. We only heard, we lived far from the synagogue and in the morning I came there. We all stand their and crying. For no reason. At two o’ clock in the morning, we lived already with my in laws. My father in law was very sick.
Q: You lived at Annenstrasse.
A: At Annenstrasse 50. We moved their, because we didn’t wanna be alone and on top of it the, they took away my apartment anyhow.
Q: Your apartment were in. .
A: Was in the Kinggasse. Und they took it away and we moved in their. And two o’clock at night my brother in law slept in an other room, he came into our room and said: „They are knocking at the door. They wanna in. “ „Don’t let them in“, I said. „They are in already. “ They broke the door downstairs, they broke the door upstairs and God was with us, my boy started to scream. And one man, one Nazi was standing outside the by the door he said: „Don’t go in there are kids. “ And I was covered till here. And my husband had schlepped out. And one of them gave him, knocked him in the chin and he had a cut bleeding and I seen how they pushed him into the car. And what ever in the house was, they took the keys and threw at the china-closet, they broke whatever was possible they broke. And they took him and my brother in law away. And I didn’t know where to. I called up my brother in law, he lived in Hauptplatz, Wellisch, Albert Wellisch and told him what happened. And crossed the street there lived an other man, a man by Leo Kaufmann. He was a soldier in the army from 19, before the war, in the first war. And he was very much involved in politic, so I called him too. And he said: „Nothing I can do, you have to wait. “ And five minutes latter, after I hang up, they came back: „Whom did you call? “ I said: „Yes. I called my brother in law. “ „What did you tell him. “ I said: „What was happened. You took my husband. Where did you take him? Where is he? “ He didn’t answer. And I said: „You wanna take one man more? Here go in, here is my father in law in his death bed. You gonna be happy? “ He looked the door down and he walked out. All day we didn’t know where they are. About six, eight o’clock at night in November my husband and my brother in law they came back. Only the shirt without shoe blisters, bleeding from his chin, they were tied down to a tree, taken away all their clothes, throwing over a fence there in Eggenberg. That’s about a walk an hour from the Annenstrasse. And they said, they had a gun on their chin: „You are afraid? “ They both said: „No we are not afraid. If you wanna shot, shut. “ But somehow, God was with us, they went away: „Don’t move. We are coming back. “ They waited a couple of minutes. They seen the car moving, the car. They start to untied themselves and tried to look for shoes, they couldn’t find, they pants they had and the shirt they were hanging there and they came home with the shirt bleeding. I called Dr.Prof. Berger: „He said he can’t come now. “ He was afraid. And I just washed his wound and pasted it together with a band aid. And he went into the bedroom. The next morning they came back, but they didn’t see my husband, only my brother was laying outside on the couch. They took him to Dachau. My two brothers, they went to Vienna and to look for a Visum. And in the morning I went to my mothers house, my mothers house was ____, nothing was there any more. Only broken, broken stuff. And I didn’t see my mother and my oldest brother, they both lived. And I asked: „Where are they other to brothers? “ I didn’t know. And then came a young man to me: „Frau Dr. Loewy. “ „Yes. “ „Your mother and your brother, I gave them money to go to Warsaw. They shouldn’t go to the camp. “ I thanked him. And I asked him how much and I paid him, and thanked him and he said: „They will be saved there don’t worry. “
Q: Who was this man?
A: A young man, who knew my husband from football. We were very, very well known. Graz is small. We were about 500 Jewish families. So whatever it was Dr. Erwin Loewy was on top. And the Burstin, Burstin I, Burstin II, Burstin III, they played in everyday in football, in soccer. My father used to ties them. „Why take everybody a ball? “ He couldn’t understand that, they running out for with the ball running. And every Friday they were taking before and Monday, Tuesdays the papers after. It was football, football on the table. And my, when they played against GAK the whole youth, Jewish youth went out to watch, because they don’t went to the ball, they went on their head and their foot. And my two brothers, all three of them, if they see one of them got to close they went their right away and got rid of them. And the ambulance was coming in and out, when gegen GAK.
Q: There were fight in the audience?
A: Not fighting like this, but killing.
Q: Killing?
A: Killing. They came out with sticks, their was a lot of students and really out for killing.
Q: So the GAK was a Nazi club?
A: A Nazi ja. In fact they didn’t wanna have anything to do with the Hakoah, but to be in the first league, they had to play. But it was always a live and Tod. It was really.
Q: And was it the same with the other soccer clubs in Graz. I think it was Sturm.
A: The Sturm-Truppe. Wie haben die alle geheissen? Die Sturm-Truppe, von der. man wird dumm,man wird alt. Die Sturm-Truppe, die Strassenbahner what was their name? Die waren draussen in nicht Eggenberg.
Q: Puntigam, Strassgang, oder in Eggenberg?
A: Egenenberg. And we were on Leonhardstrasse. We had dort a footplatz where die Hakoah. Leonhard.
Q: Where in Leonhardstrasse?
A: Near Hilmteich. In der Naehe vom Hilmteich.
Q: Ah, I see.
A: Leonhardstrasse.
Q: Let us go back to that Incident, you told me. You meet a man on the street, and he told you that he send your...
A: He seen that my mother and my brother Jacob was taking away. And he took them and brought them to the train am Bahnhof. And he bought a ticket and he gave them money. They went with nothing only what they had on their body. And after that I called up, I had a uncle still in Brody. So I called them, they should know and find them. And my brother went back to Leschensk(ph) were he was born. Und their were cousins and they asked him come with us to, what is there out their, by Russia.
Q: To the Russian border?
A: After, in to Russia, to. How do you call that where their is only ice, snow?
Q: Siberia?
A: Siberia. And he said: „No, I can’t leave mother alone. “ And mother found a nice family there, Jewish family. And in fact I used to send them packages their and to thank them. Their she stayed. And my brother from Israel, from Palestine was allowed to send a Affidavit. And after a couple of weeks she was allowed to go back to Palestine.
Q: So your mother....
A: ...she was saved. Ja.
Q: Was saved at beginning of 39?
A: And my brother. After their, before 39, I think, she went their. Because right after the Kristallnacht, December, maybe 39, maybe January, February. You know you lose, I want never go back that far. And meanwhile my father in law died.
Q: And your brother stayed in Poland.
A: My brother stayed in Poland. I sent him three Affidavits, but the quota was very bad. America didn’t let him in.
Q: He was on the Polish quota?
A: The Polish quota, ja. And he went then to Brody, married their a friend of my fathers daughter. And that’s what I heard. That what he wrote....He wrote, he never cried in his life that much, none of the family were there. And in fact I found a letter he wrote to my mother that he is skiing her to excuse him and not to hate him, because he got married without her knowing his bride and she didn’t not getting her O.K. and her blessing. And he was standing alone their and a cousin came back saved herself in Poland to Israel. And she said, she never seen a man that crying, like he cried under the wedding chapel. And he never. He died on Typhus with his wife and I heard they had a little baby. And forty-eight of my relatives got killed their.
Q: Forty-eight.
A: Forty-eigth of my relatives, what we know, in Brody.
Q: In Brody. Where they sent to a camp? Where you relatives sent to camp?
A: Probably. I don’t know. He never wrote about it. Probably. He lost an eye their. He was hid, he lost an eye. And he was even in the Polish Army, he had to go. But the Hitler took nice care of them all. And in Graz after the Kristallnacht. We didn’t see a man on the street. They were all running, wherever the could. We tried to, but we couldn’t get out. And then they took my husband, I think his name was Zwickler, was from the SS.
Q: Zwickler?
A: Yes. And. .
Q: Was he a Styrian or a German, from Germany?
A: He was a Grazer. He knew my husband. And we had plenty money. Everybody could have been saved, my husband wrote letter to the whole world, to all those colonies. Belgium, Holland, England, whatever you want. Jews, Gypsies and dogs are not allowed to come. They never seen a Jew their. They didn’t know what it is. In fact, I was supposed to go to Australia but they didn’t want my husband to go. Only me and my child. I said: „No. Whatever will be together. “
Q: So you had the visa to Australia?
A. We had the visa to Paraguay. My mother went, found, went to a office, and they give a visa. In fact, they saved my brother in law, they send it to Dachau, the visa to Paraguay. My two brothers who were in Vienna, came back to Graz, I was always hiding them, they had a big apartment their my in-laws. And whoever came from the SS, Nazi, they were here in to the house every day, every night, I always took them in to my father in law. They seen how sick, so they turned around and went away. And then they went to, they had a Paraguay visa, and they went to Italia to wait for a ship, to Genoa. And no ship came finally. And how the world is little. They went in Genoa and it was raining and they were standing in front of a store and my brother were Leo, he was a very good, he knew to draw very well. He had a sense of, he used to make the windows for where he was...How do you call it? Ich kann nicht Deutsch, ich kann nicht Englisch. Where he was working. And outside he had a chalk and he made a big umbrella on the window. And a man came out and he said: „What are you doing? “ He said: „You made an advertisement for your coat. It is raining, they should come in. “ „Who are you? “ And he said from where, from Graz. „You wouldn’t know a family Burstin from Graz. “ He said: „Why? “ „I used to be a soldiers. Und that was my home and they were wonderful to me. “ So they said: „I am Leo and that is my brother Issi. “ So he took them in and he stayed there for fourteen day, he made them the showcase and helped them whatever they could. And they waited in his house till he got the ship. How little the world is. Somehow, something comes back it seems.
Q: So your two brothers was saved. . When was that in 1940, 39?
A: That was right after Kristallnacht.
Q: Still in 38.
A: Entweder in December oder Jaenner, they went right away. My mother send them the Paraguay, we all had Paraguay visas. When they came to Uruguay, they found out the visa were false. The man who gave it to her made false visas. She paid but they were false. So they stayed in Uruguay illegal and they had Hakoah rings on their finger. On the tenth jubilee, my husband gave them all Hakoah rings. And one man was sitting on the table, wherever they were, ask him: „Who are you? “ and „What are the rings. “ So he told him. He was a very good tennis-player my younger brother. We all were ports, sports, sports. And he said: „If you win against me, I give you legal, you could stay legal here, you and your brother. “ They played for eighteen hours, my brother said and he won. After that he slept for three days. He couldn’t move. And they stayed legal there. And they stayed quiet a few, till. My other brother Leo went to Argentina to Buenos Aires. I visit them every winter after my husband died, because there was summer. And they stayed, they made a living, they didn’t need anything from everybody. and they were very good and now they are both dead. I lost them all, all five.
Q: So two of brothers went to Uruguay...
A:. . to Uruguay, one was in Poland, one was in Belgium, but my brother took him to Israel to Palestine illegal on an. . You know, he worked on a Kibbutz and every night they went out to take in whoever they could and whoever. And we sent two ships after the Kristallnacht, my husband went to Italy. And under the nazis they were allowed to come back, rented two ships with Dr. Tortschiner and we sent about 200 people to Palestine. And whoever the English caught, they asked them who, how. „Dr. Loewy sent us. “ So my brother wrote: „Don’t come you are on the blacklist. You are gonna be arrested right away from England. “ So that’s why we had to stay and waited for the visa for America, for the quota for America. We had three Affidavits, my uncle right away sent it, my cousins. And we stayed there till May 15th and then we came her. May 15th we left Graz, we sailed in October.
Q: 1939?
A: 39.
Q: Could you tell me a little bit more about the work of your husband in Graz?
A: In Graz, he was a lawyer in court and a lawyer had his job, you know.
Q: What was his name?
A: Erwin Loewy.
Q: And his family?
A: His family had a store, Jacob Loewy, Annenstrasse 50. Many times he helped out there, when they needed help. My brother Leo worked there.
Q: What kind of store?
A: Men’s clothing.
Q: Oh, I see. And can you remember the name of the store?
A: The stores name were Jacob Loewy. That’s all, Men’s clothing, you know.
Q: This family Loewy. was it a Graz family?
A: They were Graz. He my father in law came from. I was just there, Burgenland, Burgenland. He was born in Burgenland, he was, my mother in law was born in Graz. They were bodenstaendig, sozusagen. They used on Vapor, on, how do you call those, where they had the stand and they are selling clothes on market.
Q: Jahrmarkt.
A: Eyery Christian holiday, they had Markt, and they used to go and worked very, very hard and finally the come got to it and the bought the store and the house were they lived. And then they stopped going on to the Markt and he was on the store. But still, in Graz they used to have on the Mur, they used to have a Markt cabin and they always used to bring out their stand and sold their men’s clothing.
Q: When was their husband born?
A: 1903.
Q: 1903. And he studied in Graz at the university?
A: He studied in Graz and Vienna. Law. He was Doctor of law. In Graz he got his diploma.
Q: Was he in a Jewish students club? Was he member of a Jewish students. .
A: Ja Caritas, I think. Because when we got married, they all came. Ja He was a member of the Caritas.
Q: In Graz.
A: In Graz. Only Jewish boys went there.
Q: Did he tell you something about his time on university? How was the relationship there with the German students and the Jewish students?
A: This, I don’t now. When I was to, like we say love on first Blick. It happened I Didn’t know him from Graz at all. I happened, my father came back from Vienna and we met his parents on the station there. So we introduced each other and my mother asked him: „Whom you waiting for? “ They said: „Our son is coming back from the Vienna university. “ And I was sixteen years old, and I was there, and he came and then we meet again Sunday on the football Platz, you know. He wasn’t then president, I think then was president Dr. Spiegel. Because he lived in Vienna and then after a time he became then president. And from the students he was very little connected, he was really Hakoah.
Q: And he was also a member of the Hakoah?
A: He was Hakoah member right away.
Q: What was he, a soccer player or tennis?
A: No. As a kid he played football but then he was only the president with headaches, because they came the last minute to the field. Especially my brothers the used to put on the pants and were running to the field in the last second. Was going around with headaches, but he loved it. He was a very, very good writer, he could make a letter from one word three pages. He was a very good speaker, was very well liked and very well loved. Used to write for the papers, made the Hakoah papers, sports papers.
Q: And when got you married?
A: In 1936, January 12, 1936. And there was Rabbi Dr. Herzog, he was there, and he said: „He never seen the synagogue that full. “ The whole city came, it was really something and the Caritas was standing there with the Saebel. And we had a Fiaker, we went to the photographer in the Herrengasse. And there was a Spalier on both side of the street till over there. It was a really sensation.
End of tape one
Tape 2
Q: This is tape two of an United States Holocaust Memorial Museum Interview with Mrs. Sarah Loewy conducted by Christian Kloesch on May 1, 1997 in Queens, New York.
A: It was really an sensational thing like Goethe said: „Himmel hoch jauchzend, zu Tode betruebt. “ Thirty days before I lost my father. And it was said, not knowing what standing before, and but we very, very happy. I am sorry to tell it, he died to young, to much. 1960 he died. He came here with heart failures. He was hit to many times from the Hitlers.
Q: So he. Was he also member of the board of the Kultusgemeinde?
A: No, we all belonged to the Kultusgemeinde but he weren’t. There was a Dr. Sonnenwald and he didn’t do a thing. I remember the first time he was arrested, I went there, he wasn’t arrested. I don’t know how come, but and I came there and I said: „Herr Doktor, why don’t you do something? “ „What did they do? I can’t do anything otherwise they arrest me. “ I said: „Don’t you think they don’t know where you live? “ And I see I couldn’t do anything, so I went away and I took it on my one hand. He was the first one to be out. The others were sitting much longer.
Q: Can you remember some of the names? Who were at the board of the Kultusgemeinde in Graz?
A: Kultusgemeinde, the president was Sonnenwald.
Q: Sonnenwald.
A: And the Grazer Schule, the Volksschule was Dr. Steiner, still there.
Q: What happened to him, Dr. Steiner?
A: I don’t know. Whoever was be able to get in somewhere, they went.
Q: And what happened to Rabbi Herzog? What happened to Rabbi Herzog?
A: Rabbi Herzog went away , the son is in Chicago. And I never heard, he probably had ways to get out. What happened? Nothing. Very few people. Who ever came from Graz came to our house. But nobody knew anything. Everybody was saving their one life, they just, it wasn’t, it was a chaos, it was sad, sad.
Q: And what was the duty of your husband, after he became member of this board?
A: The member in the Kultus. Then. Just to get everybody out. I remember we, I was sawing for them all those people to take along things. He had plenty money, all the rich Jews gave all the money, they, we wanted then. Because they didn’t take it away. Then their came a time, they came in, they took it away the Nazi, took away all the jewelry, took away the apartment from my in-laws. The man next door, Steinberg, and apartment and that store. We, who made the windows by my in-laws, he took over to out my father in law, my mother in law everybody from the store. And they wanted to run the store and he too didn’t understand how. So he took out all the clothes and gave it away or whatever. And the next door, Steinberg, had a store, came up and they took away three of the rooms and we all was sitting just in one room. But one thing when my father in law died, one night he was very sick, my husband was in Italy that night, and I called up that Prof. Berger, he was his doctor. And I said: „I don’t know what to do. “ We only had one room, were they were and we had one room. So he came middle in the night. He was afraid by day and I remember, I said: „Will it help him. “ He said: „That will help him very well“ I knew then, he gave him an injection and that he will never wake up. And he didn’t wake up anymore. And he died, but that Zwickler, my Husband came back the next day. And that Zwickler said: „Don’t be afraid. He will have a nice funeral. “ And he arranged it, that they had a garden, not to the Annenstrasse but from the back way. There was all the way standing Nazis watching, nothing should happen to that cemetery. And it was quiet, and we were crying. And the Jews were standing: „Why are you crying? Be happy, he is dead. He will save himself. “
Q: And this was at the Jewish cemetery?
A: Jewish cemetery, is still there, ja. Very badly taking care of it. I was there last summer. Very badly. My fathers grave, my brother was secretary of sport for the Israeli government. And he used to go to the whole world, really as secretary, and he went quiet often to Graz and Graz has now a social democratic government and the major was very friendly. And the knew him all: „You are der kleine Burstin. “ He changed his, the president of Israel changed his name, they said you can’t walk around in the world with Burstin. So they changed it to Israel, Hebrew name Inbar and that’s his name. „You are not Imbar, you are der kleine Burstin. “ And the papers were full in Graz. He sent me papers a lot of them, each time he went their. And they got very friendly and he takes care of my fathers grave. Very friendly. What’s his name?
Q: Stingl, I guess.
A: He was very nice I was at Bad Tatsmannsdorf and he came over and then we went to Graz.
Q: Stingl, the mayor of Graz?
A: He was the major, I think. Banner,
Q: Banner.
A: Banner, ja. In fact he took us to the Landhaus, they have even now a restaurant there. Very nice. And then my brother met the other one from the Arbeiterbewegung in Vienna. And they too, they were all very, very friendly to all. In fact once each time, whenever he came, I always had to come to Europe. Always come, „I want to see you, come. “ So we were once we went to Hungary, to Budapest, they had a convention or what. And a Russian man, a Russian secretary of sport was sitting there. we were on the Donna. And he told him very quiet. He was afraid, that he is a Jew. And he talked to my brother an congratulate him and. After the six day war he was in Czechoslovakia and in Vienna, they played in the Hohenwarte, I think the name is. And he said, everybody stayed up, when the Israeli Mannschaft, they played the basketball, came in. And everybody get up, only the Russians were sitting. But quiet he came over and congratulated him. it is sad world. And you know the world didn’t learn anything. It is saddest thing, they are just as mean and just as dumm and didn’t learn nothing.
Q: So you husband organized illegal transports to Palestine?
A: Ja, to Palestine. About 200 people were saved.
Q: And how could he managed it to organize this transports?
A: Under the Nazis. They wanted it. Everybody could be saved. It doesn’t go into their heads, but all the doors were closed.
Q: So the Nazis supported the Kultusgemeinde in order to?
A: Yes, yes, yes. I mean, I can even, I personally wasn’t afraid. In fact I had a Christian girl as a friend. When I went with her, she looked more Jewish than I. They called her. It is true. Then I had another friend her father was Yugoslavia and we lived in the same building, we were only seven days apart. The day Hitler marched in, she didn’t see me, she didn’t looked at me, she was afraid or they didn’t know. And when I came back 1960, they go to my fathers grave and I meet her on the street and she came over: „Jesas Maria du lebst noch? Hat dich die Gaskammer nicht genommen? “ Da sag ich: „That’s right. You are sorry? “ „Ja I lost my brother. “ I said: „Not enough. You wanted it, you got it. Yes, mam. “ „But please lets be friend again. “ I said, „No, you can’t live that long, that I will write you again. “ We slept together, she ate in my house, she wanted even to marry one of my brothers. But they didn’t, naturally. But so close. We used to give us gifts each others on birthdays, she was invited to every party, we had. The next minute. Or in the building were we lived in Stadlgasse 2, the next door our dentist. And my brother Jacob had toothache, I knocked at his door, he closed it. So I screamed in: „Our money wasn’t stinking. “ You don’t know, if he was afraid or was he with them. Oh there everybody thought, Messiah came. That he gonna kill 20 Million people, they didn’t think. They were glad, they take away from every Jew, they were promised. This man was promised this house and this man was promised that store this and that apartment. They thought, they march in everything is open for them. But that the pay with live, they didn’t think so. It was a chaos, I mean, and nobody. Hitler? What was he? Only to take that was the idea and with that he got big. Because you take away from the Jews, like in the Kristallnacht they came in our house. It is ever our stuff, the took away. That my in-laws were working, standing freezing in the markets and saved penny by penny or Groschen by Groschen to put together. No, they didn’t. Or we. In Graz we came with nothing, we didn’t want anything, we worked. All seven of us worked.
Q: Graz was famous because of the...
A; Yes we had the Tuerkenschanze. You know there was a law from the Orthodox Jewish Rabbis, you not allowed to live in Graz. No Jew should live there.
Q: Really?
A: In the Tuerkenschanze, I think, it was in 18 or 17, they threw Jews down already then. On the Sporgasse, were you ever in Graz?
Q: Yes, sure.
A: In the Sporgasse, when you go up the narrow street from Hauptplatz. Und da ist ein Turm, there were in fact hanging out always a Turk.
Q: Right.
A: That’s why the Tuerkenschanze. And then the Rabbis lifted that koes (ph) and the weren’t allowed. They same thing with Spain, there were no Jews allowed, shouldn’t go there. And then they lifted it.
Q: And, Graz, was famous because there were so many Nazis there, even before 1938....
A: They were always against. . Then, when Hitler came it was die „Stadt der Volkserhebung. “
Q: Hitler even visited Graz. .
A: Hitler, the day he marched in, they came in to every Jewish house and looked for Waffen again. They thought, I don’t know, we had a factory everybody. And there was a very, sad how it is you have to laugh, my mother in law was very, very, very need. You know, you had no closets, sondern Kasten und she had a big draw. And every dress her dressmaker made, she got swatches and she warped it nicely, needly in tissue papers mit a rubber band. And a Nazi looked, oh he found something. And he opened every little package and after the had two and half hours only swatches from material, he took the chair and went to the window, throw it to the window, so mad he was. He thought he can find.
Q: Were this Austrian Nazis?
A: They were animals and the more animals the were, the prouder they were. They thought they could give Hitler more...
Q: . . power. .
A: . . power. Yeah.
Q: And this were local Nazis, not from Germany?
A: Only our own. Ja. Germany, there were only Officers. They were tall, big man, there were going like _____. But the SS, unten die Sturmgruppe, like the motorcycle gang, was a real gang, killing, killing, killing out. But they actually didn’t kill anybody, they scared everybody. And for everything, anything, my husband was four, three times arrested.
Q: Did he tell you, what happened while he was arrested?
A: He was hit, sometimes he was proud, he made all the exercise they wanted. Sometimes he had to lay on the floor for hours, and it were just to bother to punish them, to see, they never gave in, none of them. None of them gave in, they weren’t afraid, we weren’t afraid. I used to call it they are going now into the lions „Loewensnest“ when they went up to Paulustor to the. . I was there, three four times. I was not afraid. I couldn’t imagine. Whenever the Nazis came, a few of them came in the house, I said: „What is again, what you want again? Yes. We are Jews, we didn’t kill, we didn’t rob. We didn’t steal. We were not arrested. What is it what you want. Here, come in to my father in law, nobody here. “ He walked out. I was not afraid.
Q: Can you remember the day when Hitler came to Graz, visited Graz?
A: It was in the summertime. No, we had to close the windows, we had all the curtains closed, we were not allowed to look out. No that anybody was anxious to see him, but it was all close, we were not allowed to march. And we only heard the music and music and every window had a long, long flag, all away going down, they had the flags prepared fro months and months, because they couldn’t have make it so quick. And green it was, we, Graz wasn’t that schikanoes what we had then in Vienna. They let them wash them with the toothbrush the floor. Everybody looked more and more to get you angry or get you mad. It was very, very sad. Och Gosch. Und the saddest thing, everybody left and you didn’t know if you would see him again.
Q: You got out of Austria in 1939, in spring .
A. In May 15th. We had a friend already in Stockholm und was sending us, we had to have papers, we had to have, that we won’t stay in Stockholm, they didn’t want us either. We were not allowed to move there, to life their, to work their. I volunteered their to work in the synagogue their, they wanted people, we volunteered, we worked for nothing. They had food to give, we didn’t take it, we didn’t want it. We had whatever money we had and we cooked and lived in the men’s. One single man, a Viennese man he had a place in little Essingen and we got the apartment their to the Kultusgemeinde. And we paid him and in fact I even cooked for him and cleaned for him. A normal life.
Q: And you went by train from Vienna to Stockholm.
A: From Vienna over Berlin. I took us three days. In fact we were four, five times to get undressed, to looked, they took the diapers from the kid, the thought god knows what was hidden there. And everything going through to you again and again and in Berlin we got out. We had to wait for the other train to went to Malmoe to went to Sweden. And he was hungry, we didn’t have anything to eat and all over „Juden verboten“, „Juden verboten“ and then we found one Konditorei. And we went in, we got there milk and a coffee und they called it a „Hoernchen“, I didn’t know it, so I went back and I said: „Geben sie mir noch ein Kipferl. “ „Och sie meinen doch ein Hoernchen. “ „Ja. Danke. “ You know, the kid was very poor, he was crying: „let’s go home. “ I said: „Where is home. He said: „Tsutschu-train. “
Q: Tsutschu-train?
A: On the train, we were three days on the train, from Graz to Wien, from Wien to Berlin, from Berlin to Malmoe. And then the train went in to the ferry and there we heard an other language. We didn’t know exactly what, we didn’t know. And then we got out there we got an other train to Stockholm and there, the friend we came there. We lived with an other family and we slept on the floor and, but we made it.
Q: Do you know how many families lived in Graz in May 1939, when you left.
A: May 1939. Not many anymore. Whoever, you know, they had, we didn’t know it. In fact, there was a time they came to us, they gave us Catholic birth-certificates to go to Yugoslavia. Ten, fifteen people from the Hakoah too, we know them quiet well, nice, nice people. We should go to Yugoslavia and we had, my husband had relatives in Yugoslavia in Agram. And I said: „No. With the name Sarah Loewy, nobody will believe, that I am a Catholic. And I don’t go and we stay here whatever will be. And we didn’t go. And all those men, who went there, they were right away arrested and sent in a concentration camp, work camp. We actually saved our life by not going.
Q: To Yugoslavia.
A: The beautiful Yugoslavian, what they wanted save now, what were that, these Moslems, they right away arrested each and everyone. They were waiting, they actually almost were waiting for them. Probably they were not the only one, there were many, many more. And they were right in concentration camp and we never heard from them a word. And they were killed. Nobody is here.
Q: So you told me, about 500 Jewish families lived in Graz before the war and. .
A: And when we were there the last, there were very, very few, they didn’t walk on the street, you didn’t see a Jewish face. They were hiding or running.
Q: And you talked on the phone to friends. .
A: My brother in law and sister in law and the other brother in law. They had a friend in Manila and right after, it was before Christmas in fact, they went there. And we said: „Take us along. “ My in-laws were still alive. They said: „They can’t they wouldn’t let them. “ And me he wanted to take. My husband wasn’t to well, account what he was hit and the arrguration (ph). I said: „You are take along. “ Because he knew I have a trade. I said: „No, I am not going without them. “ And we stayed on. And then there was an other gentile, he was supposed to be a gardener, and they tried to teach people gardening. Meanwhile he took all their Jewelry and all their money and they came to Sweden. He was packed with jewelry, millions. And I said: „Why don’t you give it to them back, where they are? “ „Oh, jes, I will. “ He never did. He, my mother in law, gave him money, he should sent it to Manila. He never sent it to Manila. He never gave it, my husband didn’t want him make, I said: „Go to the police. Then he will give it. “ He said: „No, leave him alone. Don’t do anything. “ We didn’t do and I am sorry till today. The only everybody who took advantage, took advantage.
Q: And he was a gardener?
A: A Grazer, ja. Farmer.
Q: Jewish or not Jewish?
A: He was a goy, no. A gentile.
Q: Can you remember the name of him?
A: It will come. You know, they make me....It will come. It come, you know, it comes all back, Even since you called I don’t sleep. It goes all. .
Q: I’m sorry about that.
A: It is, you know, its sad, its sad. You know the worst thing. I am alone here. This was. . My ____I was a flying Ente. I had to fly to Uruguay, I had to fly to Argentina, fly to Israel, just to see them, just to be with them. Now they all died. Lost three brother in five years.
Q: That is terrible.
A: And. It is very, very bad. It is sad, sad. And like I said, the world didn’t learn. look what is going on in Israel. Where you ever there?
Q: No.
A: I went there the 1960ties and now it is a blooming country. What did they took away from the Arabs. The stones what they throw on them? The malaria? My brother had malaria there. They came there with nothing, nothing. They made a blooming country, they could live the Arabs and be Human. What are they? They learned from Hitler. They want them out in the sea to take away to move in. That’s why I say and everybody goes with them. Friends, what do they want? What did they do? They like it. Switz now, were they _____people. Now they are the biggest Nazi lovers. Because why? they had millions of Dollars from the Jewish people. Why should they give it? All against them.
Q: How long did you stay in Stockholm?
A: Six months, till October.
Q: 1939
A: Until 1939. In October we got, we got they visa in September 1st. The American Consulate called us. And we got the visa. And we were supposed to go to Amsterdam, but he said don’t go there, because you, then will be killed. So we went to. . What is there the harbor?
Q: In Sweden or in Norway?
A: I beg you pardon? In Sweden.
Q: Goeteborg?
A: No. We went there and we stayed there...
Q: Malmoe?
A: Malmoe is on the German border. O Gosch. And we went on the boat. And all the way down it was stinking. And it was awful the air, but. We went...And the boat were, we went with a minesweeper. Was in front of the boat, because it was all mined, we went all the way up, the border to Finland, to the, we seen the, a beautiful sight it was. It was one thing, we were out, the sun going down and it was like a kitschy drawing, a big half a sun on the ocean and the rainbows colors all over. It was a sight, I will never forget, that to see. But the many times we stopped middle in the night, because we were close to mines. And they had the mine to maneuver out, to get their to Stokholm, from Stokholm to New York. It took about eight days.
Q: Eight days.
A: Eight or ten days. I remember.
Q: And were there...
A: And we came here at a Saturday morning and we didn’t get any breakfast anymore. The HIAS came, and I said: „No, I have an uncle here and he will come. “ But he is religious and so he won’t come on Saturday morning: So we were sitting there, my kid already had the fever, he had the chicken-poxes. We didn’t have anything to eat till about four or five o’clock in the afternoon. I said to the man in broken English, he forget, could go out and see if anybody is outside waiting, in the hall where, they...How do you call them? They look for the papers.
Q: Emigration officers...
A: Emigration- hall and he said: „You coming into a free country. You could go out and came in, how many times you want. You saved. “ I thanked him and I walked out and a man want to come in. And I knew him...
Side B
Q: for twenty years. I went when I was eight years their, to his sisters wedding with my mother. And I walked out and I said: „You are Veit. “ My mothers was name Veit and my uncles name his Veit, was her brother. „No“, he said, „I am Josef Hoenig. “ This was my first cousin. His mother and my mother were sisters. So he came in, he said he will come, he read it in the paper that the Kungsholm is landing. „I am just coming from work. “
A: So the name of the ship was Kungsholm.
Q: Kungsholm. And he waited with me till my other cousin came. And he was very, very good, he took us and everything. He took us to his apartment. He had a beautiful apartment, in my eyes then. And he gave his bedroom to us. And then whole family came and Sunday they made, my uncle came, my aunt, there was a big family about twenty people. On Sunday they made us in a restaurant a party. And there I broke down and I never cried in my life. I went in the bathroom, cried my life. Till today I hear him: „Listen, listen. “ And you know what? They were all talking in English and all „listen, listen. “ And I said: „What is listen, listen? “ I didn’t know. One was screaming the other, and my husband, the kid was already in fever, you know. And we both looked at each other: „What are we doing here? “ And I went in the bathroom. I maybe cried a half an hour, I didn’t, since my fathers dead, I didn’t cried that, I cried then. But thank god, it turned out all right, I had no choice. I lived in a one room apartment with my kid and my husband and there we started to we get on our feed and thank God, we didn’t ask anybody for anything, just worked. We tried any work, I took the dirtiest work what was, I got ten cents for a shirt and saved that money and bought the first machine and then the second machine and I worked and cared and I paid my income tax and cleaned. And I am still working. Ja. I didn’t want anybody, I liked to give and not to take.
Q: So first you lived in Brooklyn right or? Where were you first apartment?
A: In here? In Brooklyn . My first apartment was in Brooklyn in South 9th Street. My uncle got us a, you know like they have the basement and their is a floor in top of the basement, their was no kitchen, I had to cook in the basement. And those people were nice and not nice. And they didn’t know why, what. And whenever they went away the closed the refrigerator and the door. And I was afraid to....I don’t know what. But then, when I cooked: „Who thought you to cook like that? “ They wanted to eat. I said: „Yes, you could have it, whatever you want. “ And I lived there for about four, five months. Then I got an apartment in South 9th Street too. My uncle didn’t let us move to Arizona. We were supposed to go. And one room apartment, one bedroom apartment. And I start to sewed their and then my neighbor moved away. They had a four room so we moved in their already. Their I was working on top of the staircase. No problem. Everybody kid, I was baby-sitting in my house. And whatever they wanted they came. But I wanted to have a friendly basis for the kid. So I took them in all right. Then the landlord came. We paid more money then we supposed to, because I was sewing. He wanted it. Then one day, he wanted to make a professional apartment. And I belonged already to the Democratic Clubs. So I thought, they could do something. I went down, it was before Passover, I went down I said: „You have to help me I have only a plain iron board, a plain iron, a plain household machine. I am no bother to anybody because I am on top of the staircase on the first floor. I am baby-sitter for the whole house. They were about 30 tenants und nobody could say anything. “ „No I can’t do anything, you have to stop right away. “ I said: „I have full, I can’t stop right away. “ „You have to give it back. “ Because the landlord was the member just the same too. Maybe he gave them. So I didn’t take it. Somehow they said, I am a sadden women, but it must be something there. I said to my husband, was still a presser. And he started already, Manila got free und he started. And my brother in law asked him to start exporting to Manila. But he was afraid to give up the job. Und he was all day in the factory there and at night he was trying to get whatever it was. And everything was on the kitchen table, we didn’t have an office. They didn’t want to give it up. And landlord. And my son was nein years old already. Then I got another baby, he was a year old. Nine year old and everything that came in money galore from the Philippines island, they needed everything, Japan was out. And my husband, inexperienced, he had the quality, but inexperienced in export and all day working. And my son when he was home from school, he answered the phone. First we didn’t have a phone. It was funny thing. He had this very fine sense of humor, after a year, he did that job, he always went down to the butcher, he was downstairs, to the telephone. And he wanted a telephone. To the year we applied for the telephone by the company, he wrote them a card: „Happy Birthday. It is a year already, I asked for a phone. I am talking with this and this counselor und I hear the chicken gauging(ph) and the butcher knocking the meat. And that’s the way I am doing my business. “ Next day the director from the telephone company came and looked at it. And he said: „That is coming in the book, that never happened to them. “ And we had the phone the next day. And they had the business their. And the director of the Chemical Bank came one night. „I wanna see with who I am talking. “ And I showed him to my son, my husband wasn’t home then. He couldn’t believe it. I thought I talk with a young man but not that young.
Q: How old was your son?
A: Nine years.
Q: Nine years.
A: And thousand of Dollars. And then when I was to supposed to. I said to my husband: „I don’t wanna give up. I wanna go to somebody, who could help me. So I went to Fulton Street here and there was up there...How do you call it in the country? In that cowboy pictures you see it, he always had a star. How do you call that.
Q: A sheriff.
A: A sheriff. And a sheriff and there was another name to it. And I looked up and I see it and I stand there. I was nicely dressed, still young. So a young man comes out: „Lady what are you looking? “ But there is another name. I said: „What are you? “ And he said: „Why? “ and I showed him the letter. „Why are you asking? “ I said: „I am a dressmaker. I pay income tax, I have a household iron, a plain iron board, a plain sewing machine. I am no noisome to anybody. “ And told him. He said your landlord is a plain, that’s a polish word, paskunjak (ph). That’s a mean, mean guy. And I told him I paid so much more as rent should be. He said: „Go over to the legal aid society. “ I came home and my husband went over to the legal aid society. And they said: „Go to the landlord , he has to pay back ten times the amount for all this years. And he can’t do a thing to you. “ My husband, went down: „Oh, no Mr. Loewy. You can get a new refrigarator, you can have a television on the wall. You could get anything. You don’t have to pay more and you don’t have to move. we won’t raise the rent. “ But I couldn’t take it anymore. And my son finished highschool to go to city college I star looking for apartment, for a house or whatever and we moved here.
Q: And this was in 19...
A: 1953. My husband lived ten years, 63 he died.
Q: And your husband worked first as a presser.
A: Was...Finished pressing then and he took an office and he the office first in the Leonard, then in the Canal Street. And my son is still, my son finished high. . Both kids had to work there whatever was to do. I used to run_____we made everything family, because we had get to settled. And then when he finished college, he got married 21, he worked with my husband, but in life, sorry to tell you, he died to young. And the kid took over, mit 21.
Q: And it was the same business, import and export to Philippines.
A: But then Japan moved in and the sold everything much, much, much cheaper. And America the labor went up, up. And that what he used to sent the gray good to Japan dying there, coming back, was cheaper than here in America. And business went out, he is now more domestic my son, makes a living.
Q: Domestic trade.
A: Its completely died out import export, because everything comes in much cheaper India, from Japan all over. America, the ruined their one country.
Q: Were you religious? ...Are you religious?
A: Ja.
Q: Traditional?
A: Ja, traditional religious, yes.
Q: Like your father?
A: Not that much. But I observe the Sabbath law, observed all the laws more or less. In fact, when we came here, I looked for work, the kid was not even three years old. I didn’t wanna leave him alone, so I schlepped him all over with me. And in the paper everything was only wanted housework, homework. You know, to sell or to make anything. Everything was on Saturday and just on that time my husband lost a job, it was a strike. He was without work and we was here with one Dollar a day. We didn’t have any money: „I said, I have do something. I can’t sit. “ And it was on Saturday to go. I said: „I am going with the train Saturday, but because it is Sturdy, nothing will come of it. “ But I need the job and I went there and it was work no, everything on Saturday and everything. And I said: „No. “ And then I met that women in. . she lived the next building and I had nice clothes, so she went up to the ___and gave me the machine. First it was my neighbor, I heard a machine going. I asked, if I could use it. You know sometime she let me, sometime she didn’t so I couldn’t do it. Then when that shirt, my husband didn’t let me wash. So I gave the shirts away and he seen the turned the colors and the laundry-man asked me who made it. I said: „Myself. “ „I gave you ten cents for the shirt. “ So I used to make ten, fifteen shirts a day, but she didn’t let me in any more. So that women gave me a new machine and two, three months, when she was up in the Catskills. I saved up enough for the machine. A pedal machine. But thank God, ja, the sad thing is only: Alone. I used to get a call every Wednesday from my brother from Israel: „Young lady, I didn’t see your face for long, so come on. “ So I asked my kids: „ Ma, what are you asking. You know, you are going. “ I packed and then two weeks.
Q: But your sister is in Israel?
A: My sister. Yes. She had a tuff life too there, you know. She went there to school, she was alone, then my mother came 39. And my brother was in a Kibbutz. A Kibbutz was poor then, you know. 1939 Israel wasn’t free yet. He was arrested couple of times, my brother in Israel, from the English people. Because the dogs, they went out to get in the people, and the dogs followed them, even when the burned right away the clothes from the people were wearing. And one day they came in with a tank. And there were quiet a few Kibbutzim surround them. When the heard that they all came they were tensing the hora five, six lines deep. So the tank couldn’t go through. And the had a factory in the back that Kibbutz, making ammunition. Und they didn’t want them there, so then they said were who the mayor is. And just happened my brother was the major there in that Kibbutz and so he was arrested. And hit, he had stripes till he died on his back. The English were very beautiful too. And every Jew was a free wild animal, you could just hid, kick, kill, didn’t matter. The whole world was quiet.
Q: Did, the experience you made, did it affect your religious life? Are you more Jewish today as in Austria?
A: I was always Jewish, not more, not less. I believe in God and pray to God and God should be good. My brothers they all shucked(pH). They didn’t were religious. They very Israel minded, Zionist minded, Jewish very much at heart, but not observing. Some holidays. Even my husband was not observing, but account of me, he observed everything.
Q: Did you have a kosher household in Graz with your family?
A: What do you mean?
Q: A kosher household?
A: Oh JA. My mother had a kosher household. My mother came here to visit and stayed ten years with me. Surly I had everything kosher. Oh ja. No. I like it, I like go every Saturday to synagogue observing, my kids go, my husband went. No, I am a Jew, true blue. Even then some even here, sometimes they talk Spanish to me, when I am come back from my vacation, I am all black, they talk Spanish to me. No, no I am a true blue Jew.
Q: Is this a Jewish neighborhood here?
A: Ja. It became, ja, we got to many, now we have two in a block. Two synagogue, it became a Ghetto, to much. But it is like Jerusalem. It is too Jew, too much. But it is save here, it is nice, I like it very much at home here.
Q: You told me, that your family, that you were born in Poland? Did you learn to speak Polish?
A: In Polen ja. Me? No. I have a Polish cleaning lady, when she came in „schmatte“ (ph). So I looked at her, I thought „Schmatte“ (ph) all my life is Jewish. But it is Polish. ____ No, I very few words. And my parents only spoke Yiddish in the house. We all only spoke it, read it. No, we all.
Q: So with you parents you talked Yiddish?
A: Only Yiddish. We talked German back to them, but they could read German and speak German. I learned an awful lot from my mother. She was one and...Because my father was in the army, when he came to Graz.
Q: In the first World war, he was in the army? In the Austrian-Hungarian army?
A: In the first, ja. And she said you gonna sleep every night at home. Und without money, without, she was going through walls, my mother. And then she came here. She wanted to become a citizen, she went to school here and she said, such a head, she was very intelligent. And that English didn’t get in. And when she became citizen, we went there to the court, you know. And it took an awful long time, till she came out, hours. So I opened the door, the judge: „Don’t worry, she is in good hand. “ And when she came out, she said: „We only spoke Yiddish. “ And he wanted to know everything about what she went through and what is in Israel. She visited me here and stayed ten years with me.
Q: And she became an United States citizen?
A: Ja. She had the papers everything. She went back with an American passport. And she wanted to go back then. She seen, she was in the eighties, she didn’t wanna die her. She wanted to go back. Then she had new grandchildren there, she wanted to see them and she went. But I had to promise I have to come next year. And I promised and a year latter, I came there, 59 she went back. 1960 we visited her, stayed there for two weeks. And looked good and stayed in Kibbutz with my brother, but had her one place. Like next to it, they made a bell, if she needs something. She was very happy there.
Q: And she stayed. And she lived in Israel then?
A: In the Kibbutz ja.
Q: And your friends, when you came to the United States, to New York. Where you friends mostly from Europe or were they Americans?
A: My friends what?
Q: Your acquaintance? Ja we get together sometimes. And then, you know, New York the distance.
A: Are your acquaintance mostly from Europe, also refugees?
Q: Refugees from Graz, and then we get met, you know, people from all around. Yea. I belong to many organizations. I belong to HIAS, to HADASa (ph), even to the, I just got a card again from they, I am a member of the Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington. I belong to HADASA and to the center and like I said, I like to give. I never had a car, I didn’t drive. I don’t run around, I don’t. .
Q: Did you attended the Jewish grammar school, elementary school in Graz?
A: In Graz, I had grammar school, I had high school, I had the „Hoehere Toechterschule“, drei Jahre.
Q: The grammar school. Was it the Jewish?
A: First no, I wasn’t. I was born in April. So my parents wanted me not to wait that long. So the Jewish school didn’t wanna take me, so I went there. In the second grade I went to the Jewish Volksschule and then to high-school.
Q: Which one?
A. War in der Pestallozi. .
Q: Pestallozistrasse.
A: Ja Then I went, when I got out from school there. We had a very good friend and man, war to from the Hakoah. We belong there too, my parents were pretty aktiv all over. And somebody came from Vienna, they wanted, a shoe-man, and he wanted to make a store in Graz am Hauptplatz. And he said: „He needed somebody. “ And that man he said: „He knows somebody. “ I was then sixteen or seventeen years old and he came over if I wanna work as cashier in his store. And was just were the 18th were the Boersekrach was. My father lost everything, but like he said: „I don’t owe anything, I don’t have to kill myself. “ But three brothers were already working and I started and I said: „Yes. I am a dressmaker, but I go as cashier. “ And it was in walking distance. Graz isn’t big.
I didn’t have to take a train. On Saturday I somehow, I went through it, and I worked their for five years.
Q: You worked also there on Saturday?
A: They were not closed, they were open.
Q: But it was a Jewish owner?
A: He was a Jewish owner, but the store owner was Mrs. Kienreich. And she was the store owner, Astra.
Q: This was the name of the store?
A: Shoe store. and I worked there, and it was a time, it was very busy. Even as cashier, I was selling more shoes, than the salesgirl. Somehow, I was always well dressed and a lot of Nazis. I am not sorry, I sold them the boots, shorter then they used to need it, but they still took it from me. They brought me candies and I worked there for five Years. But the worst. Then it came a time, a year or two years before I left, I seen money is disappearing from my register. And I seen shoe-boxes empty. And then he came, he wanted, the manager from the store, he wanted to put a add in the paper. And I used to give him the money. And I wanted a receipt. He said: „I give it to you. “ And every month I had to make out an report to Vienna. And a whole month, I looked at all the papers, it was no this. It was about I remember about 120 Schillinge, so wie heute. Und I wrote a small note, box number so und so, box number so und so and so and so is empty, the shoes were never sold und the add in the paper never came. And, what was his name, Koffler came and the Jewish man and he said he he knew the numbers...“Where are the shoes? “ „Oh I had it upstairs“ all of them it was about a dozen. And he said: „I see das Fraeulein- he called me das Fraeulein - haette ein add von 120. - Schilling. Wo ist das add? “ „No, I didn’t give it in jet. I will give it in the next one, wanna they take it. “ „And I heard, that money is disappearing? “ „Ja, look at das Fraeulein. How she is dressed, there is were the money goes. “ He said: „Fuer das Fraeulein garantiere ich. “ But I couldn’t. . He had to go and then another Jewish man came, but I was already engaged with my husband. And I used to have, and he wanted to get very personally, and my father said: „ I am now money. It is enough. “ And exactly after five years I left. And I got a nice on my own saying, I want to leave and she recommends me and. And that money, like everything in life, I got a pension from Vienna, from Graz. That makes me going, that makes, I say: „This is my candy. With that money I am able to go on vacation. “
Q: And this shoe-store. Were was it in Annenstrasse or in the Herrengasse?
A: Am Hauptplatz. Now I was there, they took it over, Palmas.
Q: Oh, ja.
A: Took over they, made it bigger. Palmas was next door and they took it over and made it bigger.
Q: And you worked there from 1931 to 1936, till you were married?
A: No, no,no. I worked until 32. I mean from 28 to 35. I think I have it somewhere, if you wanna see it.
Q: Ja, perhaps later?
A: Latter, ja. And very little papers here. This I found in the safe of my husband. What that, it was there. And then I got something from his. Because from my husband I got very little here. He died to soon and then were the Maximum wasn’t that much. So I only get from Vienna more, than I get from America. This is social security.
End of tape two
Tape 3
Q: This is tape three of an United States Holocaust Memorial Museum Interview with Mrs. Sarah Loewy conducted by Christian Kloesch on May 1, 1997 in Queens, New York.
Did you ever get some restitution money from Austria?
A: No, nothing yet. So even, I suppose to get this 7.000 Dollar what. I don’t know, everybody got it, I still didn’t get it. I was in touch with the people. I wrote them again, get back letters, I have it here, and it is not moving. I don’t know why.
Q: And did. What happened to the apartment? Did you ever get some money?
A: They took it away. The house, they took it away. They didn’t get back from Graz, from my in-laws. The store, the merchandise nothing.
Q: Did you try after the war to get it back?
A: I tried, I tried. My father gave, when I got married, before he died. So many papers, I have them all here. And I tried nobody. In fact I have from the Deutschen Diskontbank with the Nazi Stempel, that they took it away. Und I went to the German Consulate and nothing, they said nothing. Nobody wants to take it, nobody wants to do it, nothing. I am not that lucky and my husband died to soon. He would have. .
Q: And after the war. Did you tried...
A: After the war. Yes. We tried a lot of times. I was two years ago I was again up in the Consulate and I showed him, the German Consular. Went in, they don’t wanna do it, or I don’t know.
Q: When did you visit Graz the first time after the war?
A:1960.
Q: 1960.
A: We went to graves, we want to go to graves with them
Q: Was it difficult to go back?
A: Without thinking, without looking. That’s how I went. I didn’t want to get emotionally, it was sad to on the street not to see any faces what you knew, just to be stirred on it. And sad. I didn’t feel, like I came home, I didn’t feel too hurt, to much, for no reason, just for...
Q: How long did you stay? How long did you stay in Graz in 1960? How many days?
A: 1960. We only stayed, we didn’t want to stay over night.
Q: Just to. .
A: We stayed over night in the Erzherzog Johann. We came at twelve o Clock at night. We went in the morning to the cemetery, we visit one man Dr. Strassmann. We was in correspondence with him and he too tried to get anything back. And couldn’t do anything, I have all the papers here.
Q: Dr. Strassmann, he was in the Jewish. .
A: He was then in the Kultusgemeinde. And we went right away back to Vienna. And in Vienna we didn’t stayed long either. Because you still felt hate. You still felt, not afraid, but hate. It is. In 62 we went again to the grave. I went to see mother, I promised her and from there we went to the graves. And right away back, we never stayed long.
Q: And how often did you come back to Graz?
A: What?
Q: How often did you come back to Graz?
A: To Graz? Each time I was in Europe. My brother was a secretary of sport, he had a lot to do with the Austrian sport. So each time, he was there, I went with him. I was there about four, five times. And last summer I was in Tatzmannsdorf. My sister in law from Israel wanted to go there. And she begged me come with me, she was alone, that was my brother, who was secretary of sport in Israel. And the first time she went alone and I said: „OK. I go there. “ And there it is very, no Jews there, maybe one or two, who came what I could recognize. And that’s all, we just took trips and baths. Three weeks we stayed there and we went to Graz twice to the graves and then went back. In fact Tatzmannsdorf sent me a certificate of thousand Schillinge, that I should come back.
Q: Yes, really.
A: They seem to like me. But it grew Tatzmannsdorf, it is beautiful. Because I was there with my parents in 20, 28, 29, 30. And it was nothing. The baths are beautiful, clean, nice, it was really. If it wouldn’t be, it would be something to do there, some hotels are beautiful. We went all away to do of them, with golf courses to look at them. Beautiful kept and very, very nice. I really liked it and enjoyed it, even my blood pressure went down. Honestly! The doctor wanted to give me pills and I said: „No I am going to stay in a bath. “ And I came back my pressure was down, he didn’t have to give me pills. The baths are beautiful, the Kohlensaeurebaeder, shiny, clean.
Q: Yeah, they just opened.
A: All, new everything.
Q: I forgot to ask you. There was an orthodox synagogue in Graz.
A: It wasn’t a synagogue. The synagogue was. .
Q: . . at the Grieskai.
A: Our temple, yes. It wasn’t orthodox, it wasn’t reformed, but they had a organ. My father didn’t, they had a very good cantor there, so my father used to come in to listen to the cantor, after the orthodox. And they usually used in a room of there or in the gymnasium of the public school there. That was the orthodox, they didn’t had, yeah.
Q: But I found a note in a book, that there was an orthodox synagogue in the Gabelsbergstrasse. A wooden synagogue, built by a Grazer.
A: Never, never. There was only. The orthodox mostly, the Galizianer Jews or Polish Jews had it. There was only a room, never a synagogue. And then when we moved, my father was many times a cantor, my brother used to go and we just used to walk over from the Griesplatz or from the Stadlgasse, where we lived last there. But there was no synagogue. It was just in a room or to the high holidays it was in gymnasium, because I was always sitting at the top of the climb wall. And my father was always, I see him standing. I was always sitting on the top of it there. Before my sister was born, I grew up with five boys, I had to be worse than them. Otherwise they wouldn’t play with me. I was always sitting there. There was no tree high enough for me. Were all on top of them. But there was no synagogue. In fact my father was so religious, that we didn’t even eat the meat for a long time in Graz, because the man, who killed it, wasn’t a Jew. Then in the latter years, then there came a Jewish butcher. And then he start eating. We only used to use chicken, what killed separate. There were only a handful of real orthodox. In fact the police, when they seen, there used to come a lot of people from Hungary, collecting money, this poor women get married, or that poor women. And when the police seen, they said: „Go up to Samuel Burstin. “ Oder when anybody asked for a kosher meal, they sent them to us. And many times, I cooked, they thought we are a restaurant, I once told them: „We are no a restaurant, we are giving it to you for nothing. “ But they, I made them once, I was a young kid I remember, scrambled egg for four eggs and they want it bigger. And I said: „You are not paying. That’s all we have. “ The thought: „Are you a restaurant, we are paying. “ I said: „We are no restaurant. “ Then the latter years a restaurant came, a kosher restaurant, Hermann, in the, what was the name of it? Joanneum. . ,Before the Joanneumring, before you got in, near the Radetzkystrasse into the other street.
Q: Joanneumring.
A: You know, I could walk to Graz through, like. But sometimes the street you forget.
Q: How was the relationship between the Jews from Galicia, who came from Galicia, and old Jewish families in Graz.
A: Oh, they were all against the orthodox. Was a lot of their one the orthodox. We, our family, was accepted more or less, because we were in everything they did. And we did it good. And we didn’t bother them. In fact I went to school, there were only three Jewish kids which were taken. Was a, how to you call it, a clause that they don’t take more Jews than three in that school. And I was the only one, who didn’t sewed on Saturday or wrote. I went to the Rabbi, Dr. Herzog, and he gave me a note. My parents didn’t know for a whole year, what school it is. Because they would never have let me, but I was able to walk. The Entenplatz und Griesplatz was right two, three streets away. Und when I told them I have a note from the Rabbi, I did everything on Sunday. And there were a lot of directors, professor girls, pretty, Aristocrats or Nazi, call them whatever you want. I was the one, who was invited to all of their parties, not the other two girls. You are not the one, who take anything from us. You wanna be a Jew. I said: „Yes. “ And I was invited and the two other girls couldn’t understand. I remember we made a trip Saturday am Hilmteich. We got to meet on Hilmteich. So I got up early and I walked there and we went then to Maria Trost. Going home, I looked up and there weren’t three stars. I said: „I have to wait till to ride home. “ Because the teacher said: „Lets go home. Who wanna? “ And I said: „No. “ So she said: „Who wants to stay with die kleine Burstin? “ The called, I wasn’t to. . So the whole class stayed. And the two Jewish girls went with the trolley car. And the next day I got a big, from the teacher, the way, that the way to grow up and that the way to stick on what the way you believe. And thought: „I didn’t care, because it was so naturally. “
Q: Did you ever experienced some Antisemitism in school?
A: No personally, never. I never got you know. Always friendly, sociable, but I didn’t push. I didn’t. .
Q: And during you worked in this shoe store?
A: In the shoe store? I told you, the Nazi brought me candies. Bonboniers of candies. And they only wanted, I should bring it, not from the other girls.
Q: Could you remember the Nazi-Putsch in 1934? As Dollfuss was killed in Vienna?
A: In fact one von der...How was they... One from the Christlichsozialen party, there was one man, he was limping from 1918 war. And, from him I got the invitation to that opera house, now I remember, he gave us the invitation to go, from the... What was the name of that group?
Q: Frontkaempfer?
A: From the Frontkaempfer. He came in and he gave me the tickets. He fell in love with me, just as a protective. Ja. I really, truly. Like how I said, I got in the trolley, they got up. And I went to a store and „Gnaedige Frau. “ And I never had any, I wasn’t afraid, I. Und then when the time before, I never pushed myself in. I didn’t wanna to be their friend, I have been their schoolmate and they invited me. I never went their anyhow, to their parties. I couldn’t____, I couldn’t want to, I didn’t wanna push myself. But I was always invited. And the other two girls pushed themselves and the never were invited. „Why, why, just you? “ „Because I don’t go, that’s why maybe. “ I did know what to tell them. And my whole family. .
Q: So you had a close relationship wit non Jewish schoolmates?
A: No, no. No, we stick, stuck always to us. First of all, I was fortunate and lucky, I had my brothers. I had always brothers wit me around. The, two, three older ones, so I was in the middle. Always, wherever I went, one was with me. Always. _____ And when we had the Hakoah ball, my oldest brother, we both opened the ball with a waltz. And they said: „The Burstins are already dancing. “ And then the other came. We were really liked and then we never, we mind our one business and that’s all. And my parents always gave, when they could. And the same, that way we were brought up. And that way my brothers, when I called them up, my mother wants to go on vacation, when she was here. And the next day, I had the money here. There was no question. We were very close and nice family. On Saturday night, my mother was baking cakes, and friends and the boys girlfriends, there was full house in there. „Where do you go tonight? To the restaurant Burstin. “ They were dancing, playing cards and playing. It was fun. I had a cousin in Vienna, she always came, she was the only child, she is the only child, she lives in Israel. And she always Friday to us for a vacation as many times she could, because she was a.. She loved us and she stayed with me. And it was a lustig, happy home. Real happy home.
Q: And besides of the Hakoah, were you also member of another Jewish Youth organization?
A: The Hakoah, no, we were only „Juedischer Gesangsverein“, we were member there. But Be Kacholin for the sickness, we were member and temple members and Kultusgemeinde members.
A: And like Hashomer Hazair, Hashomer? Were you member?
Q: Hashomer, that my brother fixed, built. There was once Kan Samba (ph), he were the only one, he was the Hashomer and he trained himself, he made four years in one: College.
A: Yes, really?
Q: He want, my mother said, my father said, you can’t go to Israel without college. They wanted, they didn’t want him, they didn’t want him, he was the youngest, they didn’t want him to go: He was a mathematical genius, the professor once, a boy came to my mother years, years later, the professor said once he had a man, before he put this on the blackboard, he knew the answer. He was real, he put a transport system in Israel together for the whole country. He was really a genius. And he made four years in one to get the diploma. And he want to go to a passport, he trained himself, he was shuffling coal, he didn’t eat cake, he didn’t eat meat, he harded himself. He wanted to go to Israel and my parents didn’t let him, they tore the passport. One day he got very, very sick and he was speaking out in fever. He had Rotlauf and Havarim (ph) and he was on a ship already and conducting, and the fever didn’t break they took him to the hospital. Und on the way, on the ambulance the fever broke. And he was there, he lost about 50 pounds, he was skinny. And my parents make the vow, if God helps, he comes out a life, nothing in their way, he can goes to Palestine. And he went 1932 the first time illegal to Israel. Und there he went, he went the Hashomer, with two, three other boys. And my parents bought him clothes and everything, like he got married. After a year later he came back, torn and worn and he gave everything away. Because they didn’t have any women there. So they came as football team twenty young man, he came straight to Graz, they went to Poland to marry girls. But they didn’t got married, other Hashomer girls and they brought them to Israel. And there was standing a Rabbi and divorced them right away. They didn’t life together. But the time, the months he was back, he was standing on the window and was singing Israeli songs, Hebrew songs and crying. He couldn’t take it anymore in Graz.
Q: He was homesick?
A: What?
Q: He was homesick to Palestine?
A: Ja. And believe me he had wholes digging from Malaria and digging I don’t now whatever. And he was the founder of that Kibbutz. „Gewat Hajem“ (ph) and he was very proud. He was very proud but he was really a good Jew.
Q: And he built up the Hashomer in Graz
A: The Hashomer Hazair, ja.
Q: I think they had a room in the Annenstrasse? Where was it? Was it in Annenstrasse or Leonhardstrasse?
A: I can’t remember. Somebody else told you that.
Q: Ja.
A: I wasn’t in Hashomer Hazair. I think my sister no, no wasn’t there. His group was a younger group and I was already going with my husband and he was the one.
Q: Could you remember the Betar in Graz?
A: Betar was too a few of them. I can’t remember the boys names anymore. In fact Walter Kominik sent me picture from 1938, the faces are familiar, but I couldn’t. I sent it to my sister, because it was her age, she is ten years younger and I told her to right down the name and sent it back and I give it to Walter. And I don’t know if she, she said then, she told me, I talked with her every other week and she told me somebody was there. And I told her that you were coming, so she told me. But I don’t know if the American Holocaust Museum the took it for here?
Q: Excuse me?
A: From my sister the interview. They took it for the American Holocaust?
Q: No it was for Albert Lichtblau, he is at the University of Salzburg. OK. Thank you very much!
Conclusion of interview.
