United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Ralph Codikow
April 20, 1990
RG-50.030*0055 PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a taped interview with Ralph Codikow, conducted on April 20, 1990 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
RALPH CODIKOW
April 20, 1990
Q: Would you tell me your name please?
A: My name is Ralph Codikow.
Q: Where and when were you born?
A: I was born April 9th, 1930, in Kovno, Lithuania and lived in Panemon, Lithuania all my life until I was 11 years old.
Q: Where is Panemon in relation to Kovno?
A: Panemon is on the outskirts of Kovno.
Q: Ralph, would you tell me about your parents and about your family?
A: Well, we were an average family in Lithuania before the war and...uh...my father, mother and a brother. I had a brother who was 7 years older than I was. And my father was in the …lumber business and lived there with his father, grandfather that I know oflived in Lithuania. Before that I don't know.
Q: Okay. What was your childhood like growing up?
A: Well, it was a pretty happy childhood. I went to eider when I was about 6 years old, then at 7 I went to Hebrew gymnasium which is a high schoot until about…until I was about 10 years old. And then in 1940...
Q: Hold it one second. Before we get to 1940, tell me a little bit about...uh...the friends you had, the things you did during the day as a child.
A: Well, it was...it was an average life. We had a.. . we lived in a nice town. Panemon was a small community. It consisted of one long street with a few alleys. And it was the gateway to which were...were summer homet3 B for the people who lived in Kovno. They used to come over to spend their weekends in the woods and the forests where they had built summer homes. Also was real close by and it was beautiful beach and we used to spend our weekends there and it was real nice before the war. And then in 1940, when the Russians took over Lithuania. . *uh...we didn't have any more Hebrew schools and we had to go to Yiddish schools and that's when we started g ~ learning Yiddish. I think Hebrew was outlawed or something. And I studied there for 1 year in a different school until the Germans came in. And...well...uh...we could talk a little bit...uh...about that one year.
Q: Ya. Tell us about that. Well, uh my father had to leave his business because uh you couldn't be a businessman under the Russian regime, and he tried to get a job several times and had difficulties because he didn't belong to any party, and he was not involved in politics. And being...having been in business before the war, it was a little difficult to get a job. So we kind of struggled through that year, but it wasn't too bad. We made it. And...uh...and then in 41,when the Germans took over, that's when all Hell broke loose, so to speak. Uh...First of all, I remember like it was yesterday. It was on a Sunday morning. And I had sat up until 4:00 in the morning making some names for my...for my...for the uniforms of my basketball team. I was about 14years and I was...at 4:00 in the morning when I was extremely tired I went to bed. And at 6:00 in the morning, I was woken and told that the Germany invaded Russia and they're going to be in our town any day, the German army, and we have to leave because that may save our lives. So we had a horse and wagon. My father...uh...got it all together and we packed some of our belongings and took all...took my ...well, my whole family which consisted of my brother, my mother and my father and also my grandfather from my mother's side. And we just started toward Russia. Uh...We...I don't remember exactly how long it took us...a day or so to get to a small town. I believe that town was where my father was born and I think it was named…I'm not really very sure. And that is when the Germans met us and the border was closed, and there was no need to go any further. So we walked into the first abandoned home we found, probably was a Jewish home, other people who ran away, and we decided to stay overnight and see what happens the next day. And in the meantime, I remember...uh...a few hours later, we heard some knocks on the doors, vicious knocks...uh...by the Germans and they were looking for Jewish people I believe. They were yelling there were any Jews hiding here and naturally, we admitted that we were Jewish. So I remember they were kind of...a little vulgar and then they asked...uh...what time it was. One incident, and my brother kind of being proud of his Bar Mitzvah watch showed...showed him the watch and told him what time it was. They said, "Well, give me that watch immediately." And my brother kind of resisted, so when the Germans start pulling up his rifle, my mother went over grabbed his watch...grabbed my brother's watch and just handed it over real fast. And this was our first introduction to the German army Then the next day, I believe, we saw that there was no use to hang around. There was no use to stay in that little town. We still had our horse, our wagon and some of our belongings and we headed back home back to Panemon, through Kovno. On the road, they had....some Lithuanian army, I believe it was, had set up a place where they intercepted all the refugees who had tried to leave and tried and kept them...stopped all of us and told us to move over to that particular, big huge place it was on the road. And they just kept us there for no reason at all. We...we spent a few nights there I believe outside on the ground, sky. It wasn't too bad. It wasn't cold...cold. It was summertime. And no...no one knew what the future's going to bring. But after that I remember...I believe that they took us to the Seventh or drove us to the Seventh the whole family. Exactly I don't remember how it happened, but I remember that our next stop was the Seventh Fort in Lithuanian.
Q: Tell us about the Seventh Fort.
A: Well, the Seventh port was, I believe, an army base before the war. It may have been some kind of a military defense area or something like that, but it was pretty green...pretty and they separated immediately the men and the women. Uh...I remember that my brother was 7 years older than I was, and when my grandfather went with my father on my one side, and my mother and I.. . they took us in another area of the Seventh Fort. I was 11 years old at that time. And we spent...and we spent...the exact amount of days...I don't remember how many days we spent there, but I.. . I remember that right before they took us to the Ninth Fort, and the Ninth Fort was a similar place as the Seventh Fort in Lithuania, they had given them an order to some of the younger...uh...younger people who were with the meant to...to go to the women's side, and I.. . someone told you...that I think the order was that all the children up to about 15 or 16 could go to the women's side and my brother tried to go over. I don't know, he probably thought maybe it is safer and my father may have told him to do 60. And...uh...they didn't let him through because they said he looked older. Actually, he was 18. And he looked older, and they didn't let him in...let him go to…to…uh...his mother. And...and right after that we heard and knew that everyone was shot over there. All the men were shot, but my father was not there. This is another long story. My father was a volunteer in the Lithuanian army. I believe when Lithuania in 1916 or something like that, he volunteered in the Lithuanian army to defend the...the country. And while Lithuania was independent between 1916 and I believe1940, these volunteers took a in certain prominent Close Lithuanian life. They were ...and they were honored many times. My father had medals of it, and we were pretty proud of it. Uh...So before they told all the youngsters or after to go to another side, to the women's side, they also announced that everyone who was...they called themselves and those are volunteers. Every man who was a volunteer in the Lithuanian army to present themselves to the Lithuanian...uh., soldiers who probably did the massacre afterwards, and that they would take them out of there. And indeed, they did. They took them to a different place, which was called the...the Yellow Prison. They called it the Yellow Prison in Kovno. And I know that my father was there. So at that time my father was not shot. It was only my brother and my grandfather. Then the…and....uh...my father was...uh...in that prison I remember. And later on when we were released from the Ninth Fort, after being there...uh...and...uh...my father came home one day and...uh...he...we asked him how he did that. He was in prison. And he said he had promised the guard officers uniform and boots if he would let him go to see his family. He said, "Well, I'll let you go, but you better be back." And my father came to visit us. He spent a few hours with us and my mother begged him, I remember that. She begged him not to go back because it's not going to be there very good place. We knew about that. And...uh...he did go back, and...uh...they were shot over there also. They were shot. We heard all kinds of stories. Who knows why? But, we really don't know why. We really hoped and thought that being...being Xo the volunteers they were and respected before the war, the Lithuanian army who really directed most of these...uh...I don't know how to call it...uh...would...would really let them free, but they didn't. Uh...well, after...after this, we...uh...went to the ghetto. They...when the orders came, they told the Jews have to leave their towns...their towns and homes and belongings. Well, not all the belongings, but...uh...that you couldn't take with you and move to that designated area around Kovno which was called the ghetto. And my mother and I.. . we just took the things that we had. Couldn't...tried to exchange our home with some Lithuanians, but I guess we just were not successful. Some people did. Some people gave up big mansions for little homes, and...uh...they moved in there, but there was not enough room for everyone so they...people who had those homes took in their families, their friends, whoever needed it, and we were sharing. I and my mother, we shared a room with a neighbor of ours who...uh…was...we were close before the war and...uh...that lady had also lost her son and her husband, and her daughter, who was my brother's age and I think they were friends...uh...had a room that they acquired somehow from some relatives or friends in one of those houses, and they took us in and we...shared one room, the four of us.
Q: Can you...can you go back. You had told me before that while your father was in prison your mother had taken his papers and tried to do something?
A: Yes. Well...well, my mother always cherished papers, a being the, that volunteers…and his medals. And that was...we tell that was a precious thing because most of the...most of our encounter all the misfortunes that we had until then were always caused by Lithuanian soldiers. And we didn't see that many Germans around at the beginning. I'm sure they gave all the orders. They were involved. But I we didn't see them. So we felt...she felt especially that those papers and medals may come in handy someday. She always kept them on her. Uh...Well...there's so much to talk about…
Q: You had gone ahead and you are in the ghetto now?
A: Yes, I'm in the ghetto now. But...uh...there was another incident that if I may I should back up a little but that's always stuck with me too is when...when the Russians came in, although we were not in great shape financially either, but my father since he was a volunteer and he was in the army, he kind of had respect for some…for the Lithuanian Army...for the Lithuanian army before the war. And he was friendly with some...uh...people in high command. And he find out where we lived there a general who was I think the Chief of Staff of the Lithuanian army and when the Russians came in they sent him to Siberia. And...and he had left his wife and children in our town, and my father knew them. And I remember that whenever he could, he used to take some packages over there or even lumber to heat the homes because in Lithuania most of the homes were heated by lumber, good lumber. And he...he was quite friendly with them and tried to help that particular year. And right after the Germans occupied Lithuania right before the ghetto, we were sitting in this lady's house, Mrs. Mudrick was her name, and...uh...just talking about the future in the ghetto and things like that, where we're going to move homes or whatever and I.. . I looked through the window. It, it was about two houses away from ours in Panemon, and I looked through the window and here was the General walking with his wife and was going back to their home in the...on the…They lived...they had a home in the outskirts of Panemon. And I kind of felt a great feeling because I felt this is one man who probably could help release my father from that Yellow prison that he was in. And I pointed her out to my mother, "Look who's walking by here. Why don't you go out and talk to him really quickly. I'm sure he knows us. Especially…she knows us, and maybe they can do something," my mother went out real quick. I was with her and I remember that for a minute they acted like...like…they didn't even know us or pretended anyway. And...uh...she told them who we were and they nodded and she begged them to see if they’ll…can do something about releasing my father. But needless to t say, nothing happened. That is one incident that stayed with me. Uh...Alright, I guess now the next thing is the ghetto.
Q: Tell us again which ghetto you were in and how did you get there?
A: Well, from what I remember it was quite simple. We just walked or...or took a bus or something. I really don't remember exactly how we got there. Maybe on a wagon? No, I cannot. I'm not sure. I'm not sure. I know that we were there in 1941, and I was11 years old with my mother and she had arranged to live in that room with Mrs. Widrick and her daughter, Rita.
Q: You are not in Kaunas. You are in Kovno.
A: Well, Kaunas and Kovno is the same thing. Kaunas is in Lithuania. Uh, well, from the beginning, I remember there was Aktions. They called for 500 people, and they called four thousand people to work, and they called for all kinds of things. And some came back, some people didn't come back, but those things did...did not affect me personally because, as I said, you know, being young, you...you don't understand a lot of things. I 12 know...my...my mother used to go to work every day in a brigade. I don't remember exactly what she was doing and, but then we tried...we tried our best to survive.
Q: Did you see any of the roundups?
