United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with King Michael I of Romania
November 12, 2001
RG-50.030*0420 PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a videotaped interview with King Michael I of Romania, conducted on November 12, 2001 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
KING MICHAEL I of ROMANIA
November 12, 2001
Beginning Tape One
Question: Your Majesty, I would like to thank you for agreeing to share with us your recollections of a very complicated period in your life, and critical period in Romanian history. Before we begin, for the camera, could you please tell us your name, when you were born and where you were born?
Answer: Now, this thing of the name is something which is very confusing to very many people. My name is Michael, as you know, but this -- I don’t want to make too many explanations, but anyhow just tell you how things are. Of course, our family comes from Germany from Sigmaringen, become the first -- the first king of Romania was a Hohenzollern, like my grandfather. But that ended with my grandfather. So we, in fact, do not have a family name in Romania. The family name of Hohenzollern is the origin, but that does not figure in any document or [indecipherable]. So that’s why I said it’s a bit confusing. So, the result is that we are called by our name and then add, of Romania. So that’s how things are now. I was born on the 25th of October, 1921, in Sinaia in a house which unfortunately doesn’t exist any more because the o-original one burnt down, and it was rebuilt in 1954 - ’56, the modern one. So that’s about all for the introduction.
Q: Thank you, thank you. Your majesty, King Carol returned to Romania in 1930. You were nine years old. As I understand it, he took charge of your education and upbringing at that time. Can you talk with us about your relationship with your father in those years, and about the education that he organized for you?
A: Well, two things here. One was my personal feelings and personal relationship with him, and the second part was a j -- was about the schooling. My personal relationship with him, to put it quite frankly, was not all the very best. I don’t know how many people in United States and other countries are quite aware of what went on at that period. I don’t want to say too strongly, but his private life is the one that -- that other people know more about. As you know, probably, that he had a connection with a certain person. As far as I could recollect what I was told, that started when I was about two years old. And in the 20’s he left Romania and renounced his rights to the family and to the throne and to everything concerning Romania. So then when he came back in 1930, with a promise that this person was not going to come back with him. He finally did bring it back. So this situation got, well let’s say practically out of hand. Because of this, my mother had to leave the country. So she left for good in 1932. So he had been away in the 20’s, and my mother looked after me and gave me -- this is the way we [indecipherable] in Romania, you know, the first seven years at home. And that’s something that normally remains with one for the rest of your life. And the life after, when my father came was so totally different that it just was very, very difficult for me to really take it. Well, that’s one part, but the part of my education where I must say I was thankful to him because he had an idea, which is certainly very well. He made a special school for me inside the palace grounds, but in the [indecipherable] and we started with 12 boys in this school, each one of them from another part of the country, and from completely different social standings. From sons of simple peasants right up to sons of some industrialists, or intellectuals. So that helped me to, say to rub shoulders with a very good part of the Romanian people, even if at our age. And the teachers that we had were selected of some of the best run schools, especially one school. And then at the end of every school year, for about three weeks, we took off in a train, a special train with everybody in it, the professors and all of us, in a different part of the country, we -- well, we took our lessons and courses in geography and history on the actual place where these things ac -- happened. So that is how I got to know my country, as much as possible, every little corner. I mean not every, it’s very difficult, but a lot. Well, that has served me all through my life.
Q: You have just described a difficult relationship with King Carol. As you grew up in those years, did he talk with you and share his views about the political developments in Romania that he was confronting?
A: I forgot again. I forgot to mention one thing, that although my mother was gone, [indecipherable] with something was rather painful for me because he only let me go to see her twice a year for three weeks in Florence, because she went to Florence. You know, she loved art so much, she f-found a villa there from 1932 and bought this place, and that’s where I used to go and see her. And I can say that those six months in -- those few mon -- not few months, few weeks, I’m sorry, few weeks at the time, I could say that that really charged my batteries, because otherwise it would have been really, if I can use the expression, absolute hell, sometimes. Now as far his political life and that, again, I don’t think many people understand the situation at the time. I was never, at least not from him ever told what was going on. We learned a certain amount of political systems in school, but that was very dry, not in practice. So in all these events that f-finally led up to 1940 when he had to leave, I knew about them, of course, as a side line. But I had to try and find out by myself from various people, but I never got anything from him, from my father. And that was a terrible handicap when he left, because I was suddenly -- found myself in a position without actually knowing all the details. I knew a lot of things that were going on, but not all the details on how everything worked. And that made life really difficult.
Q: How did you find out what was going on?
A: What?
Q: How did you find out what was happening?
A: Well, of course, I could see the newspapers and some other people -- and some of the boys used to tell me things that I always expected my father to say. So that’s the -- that is a very sketchy thing and it’s not the real basics of what was going on. That I didn’t find out except much, much later.
Q: Can you describe your reaction if -- if you were aware of the significance of this, of the rise of Hitler to power in Germany?
A: Well, of course, that’s -- everybody knew, I knew, we saw in the papers, we knew what was happening with him, yes. Well, I could put it then that in the later part of the 30’s, all of Europe was catching fire, see, so we were unfortunately in a place geographically, in a very, very difficult situation from the east, then the pressures from the Germans. We had alliances before with [indecipherable] many people knew, which when Hitler started bullying Europe, these alliances fell to pieces, unfortunately. So our part of Europe was left uncovered. We had maybe an advantage as a disadvantage because we have oil, and Hitler needed oil. We have the Danube [indecipherable] part of the Danube. I think he liked that part also. So the whole political situation was getting more and more complicated, more and more involved. But I just found these things out in a [indecipherable] so to speak, not the actual basics, not the actual mechanism of it. That was my difficulty.
Q: Did you have the same difficulty knowing what -- what happened in Romanian political life at that time? There was a -- this was a period when right wing parties began to appear in Romania.
A: Yes. Of course [indecipherable] these people that used to come, wanting audiences to my father, but just very rarely other people, we had certain festivities. I knew a lot of them. I knew quite a lot of what they were and what they were doing, but that’s about all. I had no actual proper contact with these people. They just sort of just -- you know, like a -- how shall I say, meet at a party, that sort of thing. But not in depth. Now that was very difficult.
Q: Some historians have said that some of those right wing political groups, the Iron Guard in particular --
A: Mm.
Q: -- had great appeal to young people in this country. Were you aware of -- of their mass ap-appeal to young people here?
A: Well, among the young people, yes, I have caught, how do I -- shall I say, from their point [indecipherable] long, because through their parents, I suppose, and themselves, they realized what had happened with me and my mother. Now that did -- I must say it was very, very gratifying because whenever we met these young people [indecipherable] the warmth was extraordinary. Maybe I didn’t quite understand why it was happening, what the reason for it was, but this I found out years later, because they realized what it was which was happening with my mother. And then you mentioned the point about the extreme right coming up, and that [indecipherable] influenced politically my father. Because I must say something here, which I don’t want to be badly understood. But this person that was the cause of my mother’s sadness, she was Jewish. Not that I have any particular feelings about that, but I have a feeling of what -- because of her, what happened with my mother. And those extreme rights were [indecipherable] the Nazi fifth column, you know, were anti-Jewish. That, of course, connected with my father, from his private life. Because during the 30’s I must also admit that Romania progressed enormously, if not politically, but economically. We have our money, the leu was practically at the level of the dollar in the end of the 30’s. We had a standard of living like France and Belgium. So s -- some good did come, very much good. The trouble was the pol-political part that was not quite as it should have been. And this background of my father with these others is a complicated matter. And then of course, some political tendency, like in all parts of Europe, you know, we still have this -- how shall I put this, sort of a Byzantine influence, which is completely different to what we know in the west, politically speaking. That also didn’t quite fit in with some of my father’s ideas. And that’s why, towards the end of the 30’s, he formed a sort of a [indecipherable] we like to call it, which was not quite the thing to do, because when the real trouble started, we didn’t have the old political parties to lean on. And then you got the situation that the extreme right started agitating out in the streets. Very complicated situation and he fell into that. Now, these are all things that I -- not studied, I’ll say, but I found out many more details many years after. But at the time we were all very worried and I could not make out exactly what was going on in detail, because I wasn’t told. I had to try and pick it up here and there. That’s very much in a nutshell.
Q: What was your father’s view about Jews in Romania? What were his feelings, his personal feelings and his political feelings?
A: About me personally?
Q: Abo -- about Jew -- Jewish people.
A: Oh. Well, he never talked about them. Not a word. That is also something pretty extraordinary because we knew what was going on with Hitler and so on, but he never said a word to me. So I can’t really say what he actually felt about that. I’m sorry, that -- just one of those things I couldn’t --
Q: An-and what did he think about the Iron Guard?
A: Well, that --
Q: Did he -- did he speak about that?
A: Well, the Iron Guard you mean?
Q: Yes.
A: Yeah, well that, of course, I could feel it more than hear it, to understand that he was, of course, not at all for that. He didn’t want that at all. They were attacking him because of this person. And there were certain things that went on of course, which we also found out much later. Like the execution of these whole group of Iron Guard people. I still can’t make out exactly if he approved this or if he instigated this, or it was done by some of the government people without him knowing [indecipherable] that I really cannot say, because I was not told. And even today I’m not very clear [indecipherable]
Q: That execution of the group of Iron Guard people, including Corneliu Codreanu himself, took place as your father was returning from a visit to Germany. This was actually a visit that you began --
A: Yes.
Q: -- with him --
A: Yes.
Q: -- in London. Could you talk about that trip --
A: Mm.
Q: -- to -- to, I believe Germany and France and the United Kingdom and what your goals were and what the results were.
A: Well, that again comes into the same complex with me, because I was there officially with him, of course, in London, Paris, and then we went to [indecipherable]. But what was going on underneath, the discussions he had around these places, I never knew a thing. It seems inconceivable, this thing, in a way, but unfortunate that that’s how it was. I just know that the English visit -- you know, the English royal family, and many of the English people, did not appreciate my father at all because of his private life. So, the official part, of course, had to go along as it normally goes, but couldn’t exactly feel hostility, but you felt something that was not quite the same as another place, you know. In France that was different and of course when we ended up in [indecipherable], of course I knew what Hitler was doing and I knew who he was and so on, but I was not involved. My father and him went up in the -- in the house there, and what happened, I don’t know. What I heard that was being said, apparently, I c -- but I can’t be sure, but Hitler must have said something about the extremists. In what way and how, I really can’t tell. But whether what happened with Iron Guard execution was because of this, a-again, I’m sorry, I can’t -- I really don’t know.
Q: You met Adolf Hitler at -- on that occasion. Was that the first time you had met him and can you tell us your impressions of him and the people around him?
A: Well, of course I saw them all around there the first time I have ever been to this place. But [indecipherable]. That was a very -- just to show you, there was a awkward thing that happened that’s [indecipherable] neither here nor there in this whole thing, because everybody knew my passion for cars and mechanics. So I happened to look out the window and I saw his big Mercedes there. So one of his aides, I think, was [indecipherable] so, are you interested in autos? I said well, yes. So they took me down and offered me to go in this car of his, ride it up to the mountain at the little eagle’s nest, what you call it, it was on top of the [indecipherable] and we went down, ju-just to show you I was out of all this thing that was going on in-inside.
Q: And your father did not reveal in his attitude or -- or mood, what was happening?
A: No [indecipherable]
Q: In this same trip, when you visited the United Kingdom -- I know because I’ve seen a photograph of a dinner at Guild Hall, where you were seated with Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain.
A: Yeah.
Q: Can you talk about him?
A: No, I think we just talked, you know, what one talks at a big party like that, but nothing else. And some of the newspapers had some funny jokes about that. They were wondering if I talked to him about fishing, because he was supposed to be a good fisherman, or something, but not -- you know --
Q: So at this time you were not aware of or talking about the Munich accords and the results of this for Romania.
A: No. Not at all, unfortunately.
Q: When did you become aware of th anti-Semitic nature of political groups like the Iron Guard, and the League of National Christian Defense of -- of Achay Cuza, and -- and the National Christian Party that had both Goga and Cuza.
A: Well, there was Cuza, of course I met him, but I didn’t have very much contact with him, so on. But all through the school year, the ’37 - ’38 - ’39, I could feel it was -- something was boiling up. And I was again, very much aware of what was happening, but without knowing all the underneath and how the mechanism was working. What was happening is -- well we were all very concerned.
Q: Did you ever see the demonstrations that took place in the street by these groups?
A: No, no, no, we were all but closed in in this thing, and when we used to go out, any event or something locally, that was kept out. But, when he got to the [indecipherable] in the beginning of 1940, then of course I could hear them screaming outside, not yet. Now then -- I did find out that they were screaming because they wanted all the change because of what happened with Codreanu and the [indecipherable] this whole story has ever been brought up and [indecipherable] getting more and more acute. Not yet. [indecipherable] I didn’t know.
Q: You made reference earlier, your Majesty, to the political reorganization that your father made here in na -- in the early part of 1938.
A: Mm.
