United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Malvina Burstein
October 11, 1995
RG-50.030*0351 PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a taped interview with Malvina Burstein, conducted on October 11, 1995 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
MALVINA BURSTEIN
October 11, 1995
01:01:04
Question: Let's start by your telling me your name, date of birth and where you were born.
Answer: My name is Malvina Burstein, and before was Malvina Grünfeld. I was born in Trebišov on April the 17th, 1913.
Q: Tell me a little bit about Trebišov.
A: Trebišov was a small city, shtetl. It's 7,000 people. Mostly were Catholics and 200 Jewish families. Mostly Orthodox. Everybody Orthodox. They had a one cheder, one synagogue, one teacher and one mikva.
Q: Was your family religious?
A: Oh, yeah. My family was very religious. My father was a rabbi's son, and my mother was a rabbi's daughter. And everybody – mostly everybody was religious in that community.
Q: Tell me a little bit about your family and your family life before the war.
A: My family before the war, we had a restaurant and my family, we had eight children. I was the youngest of eight children. And my father was a melamed before he got married, and my mother was only 15½ years old when she got married. I was the youngest from eight children. The oldest sister was married to a cantor in Galanta, which is a very, very big yeshiva. And the other sister was married in Brno. He was a rabbi. And my other sister was home with her, nine years old boy, and my other brother two years older from me, he was a rabbi. He was still a yeshiva bocher, and that was my family.
Q: Was your lifestyle fairly comfortable? Do you have good memories?
A: I would say I was loved by everybody because I was the youngest. So usually I was spoiled. And I never forget Shabbos. We had one chicken, divided for two meals. Friday night and Saturday lunch, one chicken. So one of my sisters gave me always her portion of the white meat, and I spread it on the plate it should be big that I had plenty meat. But it was – vegetables, we had plenty. And potatoes, we had all the time ready in the back yard. And meat, we had once a Shabbos, as I said. White bread, challah, was also once a week, but was Shabbos. And fish, my brother couldn't forgive me, forgive himself. We had the river in the back of our yard, and we went only for the fish Friday, l’koved Shabbos. We were poor, but very proud. She didn't want charity. My brother who was nine years old, my mother took him to the cheder, and he ran away. So the teacher says, "Mrs. Greenfeld," he says in Yiddish, "I know you're not – you don't have money. Your husband is in the war, but we will pay for your son. He has to be in the cheder, a family like you." And my mother said – they said, "We will pay for him." My mother said, "No, I don't want paying, but I take my son every time." Honest, very honest, decent people. Everyone in my family. My father is – when the war broke out, he went to the Sarajevo, and he was captured there after the war. And my mother raised all the eight children by herself. She struggled, she went away early morning, and she left me, I remember, a year old, with a gypsy who fed me. So life was very difficult for her. We never had white bread, I don't remember. Just vegetables and food . . . and potatoes, that was free.
Q: Now, you – so then you went to school in Trebišov?
A: Yeah.
Q: To a public school? To a Jewish school?
A: I went to public school. I finished the first year the seventh grade. That's the first time they had seven grades. Before, they had only six grades. And I went also a must, everybody who is there has to go to Jewish school, study, everybody. And they are graded to be the public school. I went till I was 13. To the Jewish school, Hebrew, but they didn't – Jewish, they just studied history. Jewish history. We didn't study Hebrew, just, read and write, but we never know what it says. We didn't understood the Hebrew language. But we had to know history in Czech interpretation. Czech was my school.
Q: I'm sorry. I'm a little confused. You went to a Czech school and a Jewish school?
01:07:07
A: Yeah.
Q: And was the Jewish school for girls, or girls and boys?
A: Together. Jewish school was together, and so it was also the public school for everyone in one room.
Q: Did the Jewish people in your town mix with the non-Jewish people?
A: Oh, yes. Oh, yes. You felt like one family. Everybody knew you by the first name. Everybody said “hi” to you. There was no – it was very friendly atmosphere among the Christians and Jews. Very, I could say that the signs were all over. “Jew, go to Israel,” all over the signs were. But there was no violence. Nobody hurt each other. We never heard of anybody killing each other at all. They were very, very friendly.
Q: Were you personally aware of any anti-Semitism other than those signs?
