United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Ursula Pawel
September 9, 2004
RG-50.030*0488 PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a videotaped interview with Ursula Pawel, conducted on September 9, 2004 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
URSULA PAWEL
September 9, 2004
Beginning Tape One
Question: Good morning.
Answer: Good morning.
Q: It’s nice to see you here.
A: Nice to be here.
Q: Good. Tell me your name.
A: I’m Ursula Pawel. P-a-w-e-l.
Q: And that was not your name at birth, was it?
A: No, my maiden name was Lenneberg, L-e-n-n-e-b-e-r-g.
Q: And when -- when were you born? Your birth --
A: Four 24 - 26.
Q: Four 20 --
A: April 24th, 1926.
Q: Uh-huh, okay. And where were you born?
A: In Dortmund, in Germany.
Q: And let’s talk a -- a little bit about your family.
A: Mm-hm.
Q: Do you have any recollections of your family before 1933 when the Nazis take over, or was it --
A: Oh yes, I do.
Q: You do?
A: Yes.
Q: What do you remember?
A: Well, I remember the place we lived in, which was a suburb of Dortmund, called Aplerbeck. And my father was the manager of a department store, a chain of department stores owned by a Jewish concern called Karstadt. And I remember that department store, and I remember the -- some of the outbuildings that housed all kinds of boxes that we would play in, and play house in. And I also remember learning how to ride a bike. I was about seven years old, and one of the janitors taught me how to ride a bike. And I also remember when my father lost his job, and there was a change. We had to move out of our apartment, which was above the department store in a -- it was a huge building, because in 1933, that concern was, in quote, Aryanized. So my father really lost his job in 1933. And instead of leaving Germany, he bought a store just a few -- maybe a block up the road, and the owners of that store were a bit smarter. They went to South Africa. And I don’t remember this, but it was repeated in my family ca -- so many times, that Mr. Rosenstein told my father that they’re going to have signs on buses that Jews can’t ride a bus. And everybody who was Jewish in that town thought this was hilarious. This wasn’t going to -- I mean, what is he talking about, this guy is crazy.
Q: Not so crazy.
A: Not so crazy.
Q: What was your father’s name?
A: Otto.
Q: And your father -- am I correct to say that he had one leg, that he had a leg amputated when he was a --
A: No, no.
Q: It’s not true?
A: It was my grandfather.
Q: Oh it was your grandfather, I see.
A: Right.
Q: I see.
A: Yeah, was my grandfather, he had a leg amputated, and why, nobody really knows. They said -- there was some rumors that he had diabetes and they apparently weren’t substantiated, and there were also rumors in the family that the wrong leg was amputated. So I really have no clue, all I know, that my grandparents who lived in Düsseldorf, there was -- there were no closets in homes in Germany. There was a corner that had a curtain, and it was used like a -- like a closet, and there was a wooden leg in that corner. And I was very nosey as a young child, I opened every drawer and every -- every, you know, I looked into every crevice. And I saw that wooden leg for the first time and it was kind of upsetting to me.
Q: Yeah, I would imagine.
A: Yeah.
Q: Did you -- did you ask people about it?
A: I’m not sure, I don’t recall.
Q: Excuse me.
A: Yeah. I know I wasn’t supposed to look in there.
Q: Right.
A: So whether I had the guts to ask --
Q: Right.
A: -- I ma -- I really don’t remember.
Q: And your mother’s name?
A: My mother’s name was Schneider. My mother was -- came from a Christian family. Her name was Lina Caroline, after she came to this country, but Lina Schneider. And it was a Protestant family, supposedly, but later on we found out that my grandfather was really from a Catholic background, which he never admitted while he was alive. And my mother had been a buyer for a department store where she met my father, who was also a buyer. It was not a s -- it was not Karstadt, it was another department store. She had been in training as a fairly young woman. In those days people didn’t go to college. In Nassau’s department store in Dortmund, my grandmother went to Mr. Nassau and said that her -- he -- her daughter was very interested in clothing and in -- in -- in mode. And Mr. Nassau -- my -- my grandmother was a good customer, said, “Well, why don’t you bring her along?” And -- and this is where she started, and she was a very, very gifted woman, it turned out later on, and this is how she made her career, as a -- first as a salesperson, and then she became a buyer, and then she became buyer like -- Karstadt is like Macy’s. She became a buyer at Karstadt.
Q: And -- but your parents met before she started working at Karstadt, is that right?
A: Yes, yes.
Q: They had met before.
A: Yeah, they -- they met, I don’t know exactly when. They married in 1925, and my mother converted to Judaism. And I was raised as a Jew, and then my brother was born in 1930, and he was -- we were both raised as Jews.
Q: I didn’t realize that your mother had converted. Was that unusual at the time?
A: Wa -- maybe it was for some people, but not for my mother. Don’t forget, she really was in a Jewish environment fr-from -- as a fairly young woman. She was more Jewish than my father was, I mean as far as Jewish expressions, and as far as the Jewish food. My father was really an agnostic, and my mother -- people actually, during the persecution, always thought my mother was Jewish, and not my father.
Q: And not your father.
A: Yeah. And -- yeah, she was -- sh-she -- and actually her family was wonderful. My grandparents loved my father, and this -- especially her two sisters, to the point during the Nazi time where my mother’s youngest sister, as they always accused her that she couldn’t keep her mouth shut, she ended up in a work camp. So, it just gives you just an -- and actually, my -- my mother’s parents were much more tolerant of that marriage than my father’s parents. My Jewish grandmother did not like the idea of a goyte coming into her house, and even though she converted.
Q: She still wasn’t Jewish to her.
A: She wa -- she still wasn’t Jewish, and -- and -- and the ridiculous part is that my grandmother Lenneberg, she was a total agnostic, she didn’t keep any of the Jewish holidays, and they were totally assimilated. But the idea that her son, her favorite son would marry a goyte, didn’t quite go down well. Then her oldest son, Erich, who was really like a black sheep in the family, not a very good person, and who she didn’t like, but he married later. He met a Catholic woman who was a very good person, Erich was not. And she was a very strict Catholic, and she became pregnant before they got married. And don’t you know that my mother -- my grandmother Lenneberg opened her arms to this Catholic woman, even though she got pregnant before they got married. And totally ignored all what she believed before, when her younger son married Lina Schneider.
Q: So how do you explain it?
A: I have no explanation for this.
Q: No explanation.
A: Neither did my aunts, my Jewish aunts, who loved my mother. Maybe there was a competition.
Q: [indecipherable]
A: I -- I have no idea, I really don’t know.
Q: Tell me about the personality of your parents as you -- as you remember them. Were you close to both of them, were you more close --
A: Yes, very close to both of them. My father was a very intelligent man, and he was a very calm person, he was loved by everybody. My mother was much aggressive than my father. They had two different personalities. My mother always accused my father of being too decent, too good, whether it was to employees, or it’s to who -- whoever, and I think she was right. And she -- she always felt that people were taking advantage of him. And my mother was much more aggressive.
Q: But he didn’t agree with this, I gather?
A: I don’t really know, he loved her, she could do anything. My father was totally in love with my mother, as long as I can remember, and nobody could say anything bad about my mother, so --
Q: And you were close to your mother as well?
A: I was very close. I was -- actually, when I was younger, I was closer to my father than to my mother. That doesn’t take anything away from the relationship to my mother --
Q: Right.
A: -- but I was, you know, I was really close to my father. And some of it stemmed from the fact that my father was quite athletic, and my mother was not, and Jupp Geschind, who was kind of a janitor at Karstadt, he taught me how to ride a bike. It was an adult bike, and my parents didn’t know about that, and I put my leg kind of through -- you know, how I managed it, I don’t know. And then I eventually got a wonderful bike, and we went on bike trips, but always with my father, and actually my cousin, my father’s sister’s daughter, who spent a lot of time in our house. My father tried to teach my mother how to bike, but it was always a disaster. And she screamed once he was trying to kill her, so she always -- as long as she knew that he was holding onto the back of the bike it was fine. As soon as he let go, she would fall.
Q: So you did many more things with your father?
A: Many more things as far as hiking and bicycle riding with my father.
Q: Did you eat lunch together, and dinner? What was -- what was the process in the house? A: Yes, we -- we did, because lunch at that time in Germany was the main meal, and when we lived in Aplerbeck, children used to go home to eat, and my parents lived above the department store, they had a maid, and they would go up and have their -- their lunch, their dinner, at lunch time.
Q: Right.
A: And I would join them, both of us, my brother and I would join them.
Q: Were you glad when your brother arrived in 1930?
A: I think so. I don’t remember. I loved him dearly afterwards.
Q: Yeah.
A: I don’t really remember how I felt, you know. I know that I was crazy about him when he was a little bit bigger, and not quite a tiny baby, but was toddling around, and I was very protective of him.
Q: Right.
A: Yeah.
Q: And what was his name?
A: Walter.
Q: Walter.
