United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Regina Spiegel
May 11, 1999
RG-50.106*0116 PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of an audiotaped interview Regina Spiegel, conducted by Margaret Garrett on May 11, 1999 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview took place in Silver Spring, Maryland and is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's volunteer collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
REGINA SPIEGELPRIVATE
May 11, 1999 Beginning Tape One, Side A
Question: This is the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum interview with Regina Spiegel, conducted by Margaret Garrett on May 11, 1999 in Silver Spring, Maryland. This is a follow up interview that will focus on Regina Spiegel’s post-Holocaust experiences. In preparation for this interview, I watched the videotape of the interview you conducted with the Holocaust eyewitness project of Washington, D.C. in 1989, and listened to part of the audiotape interview you conducted with the Jewish Community Council of Greater Washington on March 5th, 1985. I will not ask you to repeat everything you said in those interviews. Instead, I will use this interview as an opportunity to follow up on those interviews and focus on your post-Holocaust experiences. This is tape number one, side A. What was your name at birth?
Answer: At birth, Regina – Regina Gutman.
Q: And your place of birth?
A: Radom, Poland.
Q: And the date of your birth?
A: It’s – it was May 12th, 1926.
Q: Let’s start with your liberation. Could you talk about –
A: Yes.
Q: – how that happened?
A: Yeah, okay. In – as I spoke previously, from the other tape you probably heard that on the last part of our journey, so to speak, we found ourselves in – closed up in cattle trains. They were shipping us, to where we don’t exactly know, but supposedly, from what we’ve heard after the war, that our journey was taking us to Dachau.
Q: And you had been where?
A: In Elsnig by Torgau.
Q: Okay.
A: It was our last camp –
Q: Okay.
A: – that we were in.
Q: And we is who?
A: The group, you know, the whole – you know, we were like about 3,000 women.
Q: Okay.
A: So the group, when I speak we, I refer to the – to the whole camp, so to speak.
Q: Okay.
A: They put us on these cattle trains and we were traveling. And in Germany, all of a sudden we had to stop. And why did we have to stop? Because in Germany the railroad tracks were bombed. This was already 1945, you see, most of the time, to tell you the truth, didn’t know exactly when, what time it was. But later we found out that the war was getting – was almost of the brink of being finished, except we didn’t realize. But when we stopped at our – in our train because the railroad tracks were bombed, we couldn’t go – excuse me – much farther. So what had happened, while we were waiting there for repairs, the SS had this speech to us, he said hey, you ought to be very happy, because this is April 20th, 1945, it’s Hitler’s birthday. And we, we were thinking why in the hell should we be happy that it’s Hitler’s birthday? But of course he said we will give you an extra piece of bread to celebrate it. And no sooner did he finish as the whole sky became black and we were actually bombed. Our trains were hit by the allies. Not direct, but next to it. And actually, we were like about 3,000 women, probab – [coughs] excuse me – probab –
Q: You want a cough drop?
A: No, I – I am using a –
Q: Okay.
A: Probably a thousand of us got killed by the bombs, and the rest of us, when this train split open, and we saw like an opening, the ones who were able to, we just ran into the woods. We hid out. We couldn’t stay there too long, because after all, they didn’t give us that extra piece of bread, so we couldn’t do a – hide out too much, and we finally came out and we spotted this Russian – he was like a – probably like a colonel in the army. And we ran over to him and he said, don’t worry, you are free. And that’s how we actually were liberated, which was already like not exactly April 20th, because it took us like two days longer. But apparently, the Russians were already there. I always say, had the Germans left us in that camp, we probably would have been liberated by the Americans, because I think where we were liberated was almost very near where the Americans and the Russians met, near the Elbe river.
Q: Excuse me, that makes a sound.
A: Oh yes?
Q: Yeah.
A: Okay. So anyhow, that was mine liberation. So what do you do after you were liberated? You know, we had thru – in a way, we had a chance, because we could have – and the Russians were encouraging us to go on a rampage, you know. The Germans killed us, you go out, you have a chance now, kill the Germans. But you know what? We decided this wasn’t our way.
Q: Wh-When they were telling you to do this, how did they –
A: The Russians?
Q: Yeah, did you have weapons to –
A: No, we didn’t have weapons, but we could have gotten – they would have been delighted to give us a – one of their guns.
Q: The Russians would have?
A: Yeah, they would have, but –
Q: So they would have helped you?
A: Definitely. But we decided ourselves that’s no way to go, and we just figured because we didn’t like what they were doing to us, we would turn around doing the same thing to them. After all, the German that I would have picked up, I probably would have never – had never seen him before. It would have been just picking up a German because he was German. And it – this wasn’t our way. And the next thing what we started doing is let’s go home. Let’s try to get home.
Q: N-Now when you say we, were – who – where – did you have special friends that you were with?
A: We kind of got – when we were liberated, because we were so used to always being in groups, like I didn't know how to be by myself.
Q: Mm-hm.
A: I-It – so like about 15 girls, we got together and we like di – did things together. If we wanted to get some bread – because we didn’t have like what the Americans did on the American zone, a displaced persons camp where they fed you. With the Russians you didn't have anything like this. The only thing what they did for you, we would go to them and say take – let’s go to a German bakery with us. And they would go with us and they would requisition from the baker, bread for us. So we – and we, our type of eating was very crude. Bread and water, that’s all we needed, you know, to keep us alive. So that’s what we got, we got mostly bread and water. Because even when we got into a German house, even if we saw some food there, you know, because what was happening after the war, a lot of German households became empty. Why? Because the Germans were afraid of the Russians and they were running towards the American zone. So they left a lot of their homes with no one there. So when we would go in, we would find maybe some food over there. I remember in one place, they had to spe – these beautiful, you know, like fruits, apples and cherries put in in jars, like we put away sometimes fruits. We were afraid to eat them because we thought that maybe they poisoned it. So we wouldn’t even touch this. But we would have the bread from the baker and the water and that’s how we continued going towards Poland.
Q: Now, you would ask a Russian to requisition bread for you?
A: Yeah, a Russian soldier.
Q: Yeah. Were all the Russian soldiers helpful to you, or –
A: Mos-Most of the time yes. You see, they didn’t have this type o-of gan – organization like they had with the – the Americans had. You know, what the Americans did, they found the survivors, they put them in into a camp and they supplied food and you had a place where to put down your head. With the Russians you had nothing like that.
Q: But some Russians in some places were abusive to –
A: To women.
Q: To women, and –
A: Definitely.
Q: – did you encounter any of that?
A: A – well, we learned to – to kind of counteract that. Let’s put it this way. During the day, ess – you know, I told you, we were 15 girls of us. As a matter of fact, we took out from one of these homes, a horse and one of those – it was like a coach – not a co – you know, a horse and buggy?
Q: Mm-hm.
A: But it’s not a b – it wasn’t a buggy, it was like the most beautiful si – here at the Smithsonian I walked in one time, in front was sitting this coach, you know, it was the most gorgeous thing if I would have kept it and would – wouldn’t have to had to worry about any finances because it probably was worth at – a fortune. But we were traveling in this horse and buggy a little bit. During the day, let’s say where we – if we were in a certain town during the day, we would split up a little bit and go into different places to sleep. Like we would sleep where the horses would sleep in – in some kind of – what do they call them, the barns, like. Or the pigs, or some others, because we were actually very much afraid of – of raping, because during the war, you see, i-in Germany, I never worried about being raped by a German, because this was something that they were not allowed to do. If – if a German got caught raping a Jewish girl, he was in trouble. So they usually stayed away from us. They probably were raping more German women.
Q: What – what was that about, that they were not allowed to rape Jewish women?
A: Oh, that’s was the – what they called the rassenschande. Rassen, the race, schande is the – a – you know, shame.
Q: Shame.
A: The – the – the race shame, you know, otherwise you – you like committed the worst sin. I mean, you commit a sin when you rape anybody, but this, th – it wasn’t the raping that they were worried. So after the war we did have to – the women, and I don’t – we got away – we got away kind of lucky, but a lot of women weren’t that lucky.
Q: It sounds as though you also were careful.
A: Very, very, as I say. You see, when I was liberated in ’45, I was already almost like 19 years old. You know, through the war years, you became very adept, let’s put it this way, and like self preservation.
Q: Mm-hm.
A: So most of us were really looking out for these things. When we notice in a town that there were Russian soldiers, too many Russian soldiers, that they might go out on – you know, at night, looking for women, we didn't stay in that town. We would march on. We – like I said, we had this horse and buggy, so we could move on a little bit more. And also, we met some Italian guys who must have been working in Germany. You know, they came to Germany to work. And they were also like trying to get back. So sometimes, you see, the Russians, if they saw you with a – with another man, they would just stay away from you.
Q: Mm-hm.
A: So we, during the day, we would like, if we were visible, we would go with them.
Q: The Italian guys.
A: Mm-hm. And then we just lost them. Came to another town, we looked around what was bat – we were very much aware, and I’m really surprised – you probably heard from other people because you the first one ever asking me really, that question, how – because we were – were a lot afraid of being raped by the Russian soldiers.
Q: Mm-hm.
A: So anyhow, after – to tell you the truth, how long it took us to get to the Polish border, I really don’t know, but I figure that it must have taken us like about three weeks. First of all, when we were liberated, there was one friend that was very – from the bombs, she was a little bit more in – and sh-she – you know, like she lost a couple fingers and she was more troubled than most of us. You know, like I had a little bit of a i-injury, you know, like a shrapnel? A piece of shrapnel got into my hand, but it wasn’t – you know, I never felt it. You know, it wasn’t dangerous for me. But with her, we had to put her in in a hospital. So she actually stayed in the hospital. We couldn’t, you see, we couldn’t keep on staying in the same town for too long because we were actually afraid of this. So we actually had to leave her in the hospital, but there was another friend that she met that stayed with her. So she was like more or less taken care of. But we kept on going and probably took us probably like about three weeks til we got to the Polish border. And when I got there – and you know, as you were walking – you see, when we were liberated, would you believe that most of us didn’t realize that most of our families were murdered? We still were hoping that maybe somebody’s gonna be alive because I will tell you, in a way maybe that was good, because that’s what kept us through all the other times, kept us going, because if not we probably at one time or another, we would have given up. But that was, in a way, kept us – hey, you stay alive because you promised that we’re gonna meet at home. You know, like my boyfriend told me, you know, on the last, when they were separate – when they separated us in Auschwitz he said to me, if we stay alive, just remember, meet me in mine hometown. But also, he didn't know that my mother told me this, when we were, you know, it was just practically in the beginning of the war when she got us all together and she said, just remember, if God forbid we should get separated – you see, never thinking that what’s going to happen, that it’s going to be this mass killing, but just separated. If we go, maybe I was someplace else or something, she says, remember, after the war, we’ll meet in our place, you know, in our home. So naturally, the first thing what I wanted to do is get back home. So I did. That’s how – and most of us –
Q: Back to Radom?
