United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Jack Mondschein
February 15, 2013
RG-50.030*0684
PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a recorded interview with Jack Mondschein, conducted by Ina Navazelskis on February 15, 2013 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview took place in Los Angeles, CA and is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
JACK MONDSCHEINPRIVATE
February 15, 2013
Question: This is a United States Holocaust Memorial Museum interview with Mr. Jack Mondschein, on February 15th, 2013, in West Lake Village, Los Angeles. Thank you Mr. Mondschein for agreeing to meet and talk with us today.
Answer: You’re welcome.
Q: I’d like to start like I do in all interviews –
A: Okay.
Q: – from the very beginning. Tell me what your name was at birth, if it’s different from now.
A: Oh, my – my – my birth name was Jakob(ph) Josef(ph).
Q: Jakob(ph) Josef(ph), uh-huh. And –
A: I was born in January 13.
Q: Date, year, do you remember?
A: January 13, 1923.
Q: Where?
A: I was born in Chzanów(ph).
Q: Chzanów(ph)?
A: Chzanów(ph), yeah.
Q: Uh-huh.
A: Shall I spell it for you, or –
Q: No, that’s okay. Or actually yes, please do spell it for us.
A: The – the city called – spell it C – Chzanów(ph), I – I wrote down that I – c-h-z-a-n-o with a point, w, Chzanów(ph).
Q: Is it a big city?
A: It’s a small city, was a population – population was maybe – Jews was like maybe 20,000 Jews or 25,000. The rest was Polish. It’s 40 kilometer east of Kraków.
Q: Ah, so it’s clo – sort of in the south of Poland.
A: Clo – clo – clo – clo – seven kilometer from Auschwitz.
Q: Oh, oh. What –
A: Birkenau and Auschwitz.
Q: Bir – that’s very close.
A: Very close.
Q: Excuse me just for a second, our camera person asked, could you put the envelope down, okay?
A: Oh, okay.
Q: Yeah. It’s the sound, it catches, it catches.
A: Yeah, okay.
Q: Who was your father, tell me a little bit about your family, what – who were – you were born into. Your father, your mother, the people that you grew up with.
A: Oh, I grew up – I don’t remember my father.
Q: What was his name?
A: His – his – his name was Chaim. He – he was in the World War I, and he w – he took – they took him to – he was in the Austrian army, and they took him to bene – in the war they took him – the Russian took him to Siberia. He was a – he was a –
Q: Prisoner of war?
A: Prisoner of war, you know, he spent four years there. And then he came and he marry mine mother – my mother, her name was Rizel(ph).
Q: Her name was Rizel(ph).
A: Rizel(ph) Friedman(ph).
Q: Friedman(ph). And your father’s name, did you tell me –
A: Was Chaim –
Q: Chaim.
A: – Mondschein was his name. And I was a year old when he died. He died, he was 37 years old.
Q: Oh my. Oh my, what did he die from?
A: Well, he came back and they used to – he used to have a partnership with – with his brother, they used to sell horses. And we used to have a farm in – in – in Chzanów there. We used to – we used to have a little farm, he was partner with his – with his brother, they were selling horses, and –
Q: It – with his brother?
A: Yeah. And they used to – when they – they got the attitude when they sell horses, they have to – they have to drink you know, they have to drink vodka, you know, to make – to make the guys get numb, to buy the horse, that’s what I – this what they did, you know? Not cheating, but that’s the way it was, and – and he –
Q: Kind of make the customer happy.
A: Yeah, customer happy, and this was, I think he got a heart problem and he die in a – in a heart attack. And he was – this what my mother told me, I – I never remember my father. I know him from pictures just.
Q: How sad. Were you the youngest child, the only child?
A: No, I got the older brother, his name is Ulrich(ph), and –
Q: How much older, when was he born?
A: One year older. He was one year older from me and – and when the war broke – broke out, th-the second war, there’s janu – September 1st, 1939, the – Germany came in –
Q: We’ll get to that –
A: Yeah.
Q: Right now I want to find out more, but –
A: Yeah, this, yeah.
Q: So, Ulrich(ph) was your older brother, and there was you, and your mother.
A: Mother.
Q: And so she was left with two babies.
A: Two babies, yeah, and the – and the uncle who got partner with my father, they separate completely, you know, and we live in th – in this little farmhouse, belonged to our grandma.
Q: On your mother’s side?
A: No, on my father’s side. She let us live without – we didn’t pay any rent, we just support her for taxes to pay, that’s it.
Q: Did she live with you?
A: No, no, she has a separate place she lived, not far away from us.
Q: Uh-huh. And –
A: Her na – her name was Lya(ph).
Q: Lya(ph). Do you remember her?
A: Oh yeah, I was – she die in 1939 after the occupation, she died.
Q: Oh, oh. Tell me about her. Did she tell you stories about your father?
A: Not much really. My mother told me about my father, the – how he was a prisoner, he came back and he brou – he-he was a shoemaker in Siberia. And he brought a lot of gifts when he came back, you know. I don’t know where he got those things, but he brought back. He was doing business over there.
Q: Well, he – he was in Siberia during such a turbulent time.
A: Yeah, he was four years there prisoner, and he came back and –
Q: You mean, there was – he probably was prisoner of the tsar, and then the tsar is knocked down and there’s the Bolshevik revolution, and all that.
A: Yeah, and then – yeah, all of that, yeah, he went through this whole thing. I don’t know where – oh, he went through the – yeah, he must go through the Bolsheviks, there was Lenin ki – Trotsky come in ’18 or ’17.
Q: ’17.
A: 1817.
Q: Yeah. So, tell me about your mother then. What kind of a person was she?
A: Oh, she was a nice person, very nice. She was a nice person, she – where we lived she opened a little store for her, you know, grocery store. And – and that’s the – she didn’t pay any rent to my grandma, and –
Q: So it was in town, the house was in town? Or it was on a farm –
A: No, it wasn’t on a farm, it was – was in town, but back, like – like here, you know, it wasn’t in the middle in the town. We was living back, we used to walk to school, it took us like a – maybe a half an hour to go to school, to the private school.
Q: Oh. Was there a state school as well?
A: Yeah, there was a school there, and vi – vi – after the war I – we go – we gonna come back, I visit the school over there.
Q: Oh, then we will – yes, we’ll come back and talk about that.
A: Yeah, I visit the school with my brother there.
Q: Was it a Jewish school or was it –
A: No, we used to go – there was – the school was for C-Catholics and Jews, but we used to have a – a Jewish – a Jewish teacher, who teach –
Q: Religion?
A: – Jewish religion, and they Christian religion. Do you know, we used to have – but we used to be –
Q: Together.
A: – together. Not with girls, the girls were separate.
Q: So this was a boys’ school?
A: Boys’ school, yeah.
Q: Uh-huh. And when you were going to school, that’s from the very first, from the very first class, you attended this particular place?
A: Over there was different. Here, they go to pre-schools.
Q: Yeah.
A: Over there we went to the Hebrew school. When we was – when we was five years old, six, we went to a Jewish Hebrew school, every day we went, if you learn Hebrew. We learn pray and we learn to be a Bar Mitzvah, you know, everything. And then we started the – the public school we start like when we was eight years old, over there, I think. I don’t –
Q: Mm-hm. Do you have memories of either school?
A: Oh yeah, I do.
Q: What are some of those memories?
A: I have me – what is?
Q: Well, let – what are the things that you still remember to this day? Any events that happened in the school?
A: Oh, I was – the school wi – I was very good in other things. I was good in history and arithmetic, and we exercise, you know. And – and we used to go with the – with the school we used to go to – when I was, I think, nine years old, or 10, we used to – we went to Kraków, you know, city. Over there they called the – the [indecipherable] where only kingdoms lay there. I jus – just told my son this story, and we used to go over there with the school, and we used to visit there.
Q: Who was the most fa – who was the most famous king that was buried there?
A: The king? Moleska(ph) Hobra(ph) used to be one. There used to be a lot of kings i-in Poland, you know?
Q: Did you learn about – were – were you – when you say you were very good in history, was it Polish history?
A: Yeah, Polish, Polish his –
Q: Polish history.
A: We learned Polish history.
Q: Was there a king named Yagauwel(ph)?
