NAME: WILLIAM R. BARTON INTERVIEWER: KAETHE SOLOMON CAMP: DACHAU
DATE:
Q: Your full name is? A: William R. Barton.
Q: William R. Barton. And your address?
A: 1033 White Oak Avenue, Atlanta, Ga. 30310 Q: Your date of birth?
A: February 18, 1915.
Q: And your age at the time of viewing Dachau, since you say you didn't liberate it.
But you were there. Is that's what you said? A: Yes.
Q: And your age at that time? A: I can’t remember.
Q: You don’t remember. O.K. That’s fine. A: 1940...let’s say 1945....
Q: So you were....
A: 27.
Q: 27 years of age at that time. And your prospective profession at the beginning of the war? What you had planned to be when you went into the war?
A: I was working at Rich's Department Store when I went into the Service. Q: And your present occupation is?
A: Still there.
Q: At Rich's Department store. And your military unit was what?
A: 222nd Infantry , 42nd Rainbow Division. 222nd Infantry Medical Detachment is really where I was.
Q: And your rank at the time you were at Dachau? A: Technical Sergeant.
Q: And Dachau was the camp then that you had been involved with? A: Right.
Q: How did you first hear about the camp, Mr. Barton?
A: I really don't remember the first time or anything like that. The troops had heard of it even before we went over. We heard of Dachau and what was the other one? What's that other big one they have there?
Q: There's Buchenwald. There were quite a few camps. A: We just heard of them.
Q: But you did hear the names, is that it? How were they identified? Was the word "concentration camp" used at the time? You are not too sure. It’s a long time since, so its hard to remember.
A: Right. Concentration camp was probably the terminology.
Q: How did you come across the camp? How did you get there in the area? A: We were riding right at that particular time. Just advancing. That’s all Q: And you came across the camp?
A: We heard that we were going to run into it.
Q: Were you prepared in any way for what you were going to see? A: Really not.
Q: You were there and you saw the camp. What do you remember seeing?
A: Just a large type enclosure. Before you got up to the main gate, though, there was an American tank that the Germans had captured and had fired back on the American troops, and the American troops had finally burned it up. That was standing there. That was the first thing we saw more or less, because it was right
outside.
Q: Do you remember the date that you were there? A: No
Q: That’s all right. I was just interested to see whether or not you remembered. A: Those dates were....
Q Like a fog right now.
A: That's right, just a day was a day, there was no significance.
Q: It completed when the night came. You knew the day was finished. A: Right, right.
Q: So you remember seeing the tank in front of you.
A: Yes. And then we stayed around there awhile. Also, there was a railroad siding there and as well as I recall there were at least two or three rows of tracks. And those sidings were full of boxcars with human beings in them, and the smell, the stench, was just so awful that I said I don't want to go inside and see anymore of this stuff at all. So I just hung outside with some more of us. There weren't too many American troops right at that time, because we were advancing so fast, and I was just fortunate to be right amongst that little head group. I was in the medical detachment and we were right close following them for....
Q: Having been in the medical detachment, did you receive any assignments for this particular area for your detachment?
A: No.
Q: Did you speak to those that did go into the camp when they came out of the camp?
A: Oh yes. I have some pictures. There was a.fellow that took pictures inside. I’ve got some of those.
Q: Did they share anything with you that they had seen or heard or experienced while in the camp? Did they talk about being in the camp?
A: Yes, but just the horrors. The majority of the human beings there was nothing but skin and bones.
Q: Did you see any alive?
A: Oh , sure. They were all out near the fence area, and quite a few of them had even got out the main gate. Most of them were in striped uniforms, so to speak.
Q: Did any of them come towards you? Were you near any of them? A: I don't even recall.
Q: Do you remember your feelings at the time you saw these people? A: It’s just something that you didn't believe happened.
Q: Did you look at them as human beings?
A: Sure. It’s just horrible to look at some of the pictures and see these [unintelligible] by the railroad tracks. Just looked in those boxcars and just see such...as I said, it was just horrible.
Q: Did you see quite a bit of combat in your war experience? You saw a lot of death?
A: Oh yes.
Q: When you saw these boxcars filled with bodies, which meant certainly death, was your reaction any different to that than the reaction you had to seeing death in combat? Do you remember feeling any different between what you saw in combat and what you saw there, or was it just one war experience?
A: It was a war experience you might call it. Q: How long were you around that camp?
A: I presume we stayed around there close to two hours, then we went to hunt a place to stay for the night. And we moved into a beer hall. I think they call it a rathskeller. We were unloading the equipment to take in there, and the Germans opened up one of their guns. There was a fellow just about six feet in front of me who got hit on the head and on the shoulders with some of the yak yak. That was, as far as I recall, something like a couple hours or so, after we really had gone into the concentration camp as such.
Q: Did you say you saw any civilians? A: Oh. sure.
Q: Were you able to converse with them at all? Did you have any knowledge of German?
A: I picked up a little, and also one of the fellows that ran around with me spoke German. He was a Mennonite, and of course I stayed with him. We were really quite close. [Unintelligible] ran right together every second and we even went in some of the German homes over there where the fields were.
Q: What were some of the things these people in the German homes shared with you? How did you feel about the Germans?
A: In a way you felt sorry for the so-called family unit, because I think that they were in the same position we were, that they were forced into that situation. And in the military they made exceptions to that. They were all very devoted to their German Army.
Q: Were they Nazis as such?
A: When we would get there, naturally they would say anti-Nazi. That was their philosophy which I guess they did in order for us to accept them as anti-Nazi, instead of Nazis.
Q: Did you accept them, really, or did you just have to make do?
A: You just associated with some of them, so to speak, because you had no way of knowing what they were.
Q: You weren’t fearful to associate with them? We are talking about the civilians. A: In a way, yes. I didn't trust some of them too far.
Q: But you did go into their homes? A: Yes.
Q: And when you went in there, did you see any obvious signs of their membership in the Nazi party? Pictures or uniforms?
A: You’d see pictures of their sons or son-in-laws or something of that nature in their homes, yes, definitely.
Q: Would you question them if you saw those pictures? Did you question them?
A: You might say, “Is this your son?” or “Who is this?” or something of that nature, and most of the time they would volunteer the information. The picture was prominent, and they would see your kind of gazing at it and would say when they saw that “That's my son.”
Q: Was this after you saw Dachau that you went into the Germans homes? A: Maybe both.
Q: Did you feel differently, after you saw Dachau, going into a German home as opposed to the way you may have felt before you saw Dachau going into a German home?
A: I really don't recall to be exact, because they were Germans, and that was the whole thing. They were Germans, and we just had a little reluctance in believing them or being associated with them in any way.
Q: How do you feel about Germans today?
A: To be honest with you, I am still not too close to a German. I don’t know why -- just can't accept them. I can't accept Japanese.
Q: Japanese?
A: As well. It's just something that you feel inside, that what those people caused in the world and in particular to individuals.
Q: Did you see the Holocaust TV movie? A: I saw excerpts of it, that's all.
Q: You chose not to watch it? You just didn't have time? A: I didn’t have time.
Q: I thought maybe you specifically said I didn’t want to. A: No, I just didn’t have time.
Q: Have you ever shared the Dachau encounter with your family? Were you married at the time you were in service?
A: Yes.
Q: Did you share that Dachau experience with your wife, through letters at the time? Do you remember?
A: Probably did.
Q: You have no letters? Letters weren’t kept? A: No.
Q: Were your children ever made aware of your experience? A: Didn’t have any children.
Q: Didn’t have any. Didn't ask you before whether or not you had children. Have you ever shared the Dachau experience you had before this?
A: You mean mentioned it to people? Q: Yes.
A: Yes, I have, definitely.
Q: Were they receptive in listening or did they not believe you? What was their reaction when you shared it with those people?
A: They were just like we were -- just unbelievable. They just couldn’t believe that those certain conditions would exist.
Q: How did you see the Dachau experiences at the time? Sometimes it is difficult to differentiate between thinking about it at the time and thinking about it after the fact. Did you see it as a total political means of war? Did you see it as a specific religious persecution?
A: Political.
Q: What about the other men that went into the camp? Did they share any view with you as to how they felt about what they saw? Were there any Jewish men in your group that you remember or that you can identify?
A: Yes, there were. In fact, this fellow that took the pictures and gave them tome was Jewish. Of course, he would just rave about it. He would talk about it, what went on there.
Q: Was there a difference in the way he received that experience as opposed to the way you did because he was Jewish, do you think?
A: I just don't know right now.
Q: Fine. I was just trying to find out exactly what you do remember from that period. And not remembering is information too.
A: Yes.
Q: Were there any German civilians around that you remember at the time that you were near, outside of Dachau?
A: I don’t believe there were many German civil ians around. As I said, there weren't too many American troops right at that first so-called couple of hours.
Q: You said you were not going to go in there. You had seen those boxcars and it was more than enough, apparently, for you to view at that time.
A: Yes.
Q: Did you just stand out there? What did you do? A: Yes.
Q: Just stand. And when you stood out there, what did you see happening? Fellow soldiers going in there? Describe to us what you saw.
A: They were just milling around, going into the camp. They wouldn't let too many of them go in.
Q: Who wasn't letting too many go in? A: The American guards.
Q: There were American guards there?
A: Yes, after they took over, there were American guards there on the gate. There weren’t too many allowed in there until they investigated.
Q: And did you see any reactions that your fellow soldiers had to what they saw --vomiting, looks on their faces?
A: Yes. Like I said, the smell arouond there was just so horrible. You just couldn’t stand it.
Q: And you just kind of stood there and watched the action going on? A: Yes. Ready to move out.
Q: Couldn't wait to leave the scene? A: Right
Q: What is your religion? A: I am a Methodist.
Q: And did you consider yourself a religious person at the time? A: Yes.
Q: And when you saw this scene at Dachau, were there any conscious thoughts of God or religion at the time that you can remember?
A: Naturally. Just thoughts of one human being so called doing that to another human being without him being able to fight back. That’s the gist of it.
Q: Did that experience, specifically, at Dachau create a difference in feeling toward the Civil Rights movement here in the United States or Viet Nam war or The Mid East situation? Did it in any way affect your thinking about those political situations? Did you relate in any way?
A: I don't know.
Q: Haven’t thought too much about it?
A: No. I really haven't. I didn’t relate them really as similar.
Q: Because you mentioned you saw this as a political situation and I was kind of interested in what you might have thought [unintelligible]. Okay. Did you see the Dachau experience as primarily a Jewish persecution?
A: That's really what it was classified as according to my understanding. More or less a Jewish situation.
Q: How did you see it?
A: Now, personally, I don't know whether they were all Jews or not so I couldn’t answer that. All I can say is that’s what we were told. I think it is more political than it was Jewish.
Q: Did this cause any change in attitude toward Jews as a people in light of that fact that you recognized that it was classified as a Jewish persecution?
A: I didn’t have any attitudes. A human being is a human being is my philosophy.
Q: Do you feel a need to do something today to make sure a similar situation does not occur again?
A: Would like to, but here again it gets back into politics.
Q: Your being here today is a help. Sharing your experience. Do you think teaching Holocaust which Dachau is certainly classified as part of is an appropriate subject to be taught in the church?
A: There again, depends on which way that you are talking about as far as feeling out some of the information that existed as such. I don’t see any harm in it.
Q: You don’t see any harm in it? A: Right.
Q: What do you think it would do if, indeed, it was taught in the church? A: I don't know. There again, you got pros and cons.
Q: Let's talk about the cons. Do you think it could do some damage to expose a congregation to some of this [unintelligible]?
A: I don't think so, really. I just don't see how it really could. Q: What good do you think it would do? Talking about the pros.
A: Getting back to your question you asked me what we could do to prevent an occurrence of something like that. There again, I don’t have the answer. I don't know what we could do.
Q: Do you think teaching it would be one way of helping at least?
A: It would help at least. Yes. There again, if you get another type dictator in anywhere like Hitler, then everything is gone -- your morals, all your teaching, and everything. So there you are.
Q: In light of the Mid East situation today and the anticipated oil shortage, do you think something like this can occur again? To try to put the blame some place for the oil shortage do you think they would blame Israel and United States' connection with Israel? Do you think this is a feasible thing ?
A: I don't think so. I just hope it doesn’t. Let’s just do it that way.
Q: Is there any other experience you had at Dachau that you would like to share with us that we have not covered? Any question that you have not answered. Information that you would like to share with us at this point.
A: No, I don't think so.
Q: We thank you very, very much for your time and sharing your experience with us.
