NAME: EUGENE MCPHEETERS INTERVIEWER: DR. FRED R. CRAWFORD CAMP: DACHAU DATE: NOVEMBER 13, 1979
Q: Our guest is Eugene McPheeters, and Mr. McPheeters, could you give us your whole name?
A: Eugene Quentin McPheeters.
Q: And what is your home now? Where? A: Chamblee, Georgia.
Q: In Chamblee, Georgia. Are you a Georgian by birth?
A: No, I’m from Tennessee. Cleveland, Tennessee originally.
Q: So am I. So is my father. We are talking about the experience you had during World War II, and seeing Dachau, the concentration camp. But could we start by a brief history, for example, of your military career? Were you in the Army?
A: Yes, I was in the Army. I went originally into an armored outfit, and we were sent overseas to England. We stayed there several months, five months as a matter of fact. We were transferred to the infantry, given six weeks of infantry training, and sent over to the front lines. I landed on Omaha Beach in October and then was sent to the front line, as a replacement, to the 103rd Infantry Division. I was hit three days after I was in combat. I went back to the hospital and stayed for one month. I was hit the day before Thanksgiving, and on Christmas Eve I was sent back to my outfit so I missed the Battle of the Bulge. We were in the 3rd Army sector at the time, even though we were assigned to the 7th Army. We had been assigned to the 3rd Army sector to the Saar Valley to reinforce the 3rd Army. We kicked off the last drive on March 15th, and we crossed the Seigfried Line and went across the Rhine to Darmstadt. Then our outfit was reassigned, and we turned south. We went through southern Germany, through Landsberg. I went into the cell where Hitler spent his prison days and then we went on down through southern Germany and Austria and met the 5th Army through the Brenner Pass, in Austria. I stayed with the 103rd Division as occupation in Austria until September...
Q: Of 1945?
A: 1945 and then they sent the younger people who didn't have enough points for discharge up to the 45th Division. They were encamped near Munich, I believe, and we went up to Dachau one day.
Q: Now, what month was this in? August? September? A: This was in September.
Q: Of 1945?
A: Yes.
Q: Did you know about Dachau's existence before this? How did you find out that Dachau existed?
A: Yes we knew about it through the Stars and Stripes and other publications. We had started working out...yes, we knew about it. In fact, I had talked with people who had actually been in the outfits that took the concentration camp.
Q: So how did you get up there? Did you have a truck, a jeep?
A: We were in temporary billets. I am not sure exactly what facilities we had in Munich, but we discussed the thought of going up to see what had happened at Dachau, so we went on a military truck.
Q: What do you remember about that experience at Dachau?
A: I remember the high masonry walls, stucco walls, and they were capped with terra cotta coating, and they had speakers around the walls that the local people told us played music all the time. And then we went on in through the gates. In fact, the Army trucks pulled in through the gates. I believe we had quite a large parking area there. They had wire fences, like chain link fences, with barbed wire on top, and these different areas were divided into different sections, like you would have maybe a corral or a cabin or something like that where fences would be more secure. There were little shacks. I don't remember exactly how they were built, but temporary, and they were built of the same type. And they were in these different compounds. The main building was a mason building. It was quite complex in structure, and it had different rooms -- holding areas, I would assume -- and I remember quite distinctly this large holding room with quite a low ceiling. And then off to the east, I believe, was a large room -- I would say about 25 feet x 50 feet -- and it looked like a shower. We had a guide, and he told us that this was the gas chamber. But it looked very much like a large shower. It had drains on the floor, and it had the showers in it. Through the end of this building were two large doors and connected to this room, through the doors, was a large high-ceiling room, which was even bigger than the shower. I would imagine it was maybe 50 or 60 feet square with the high ceilings, probably 12, 14, maybe 15 feet. When we were there the camp had been cleaned and all the bodies had been removed, but you still could hardly stand the odor that was in the chamber. We didn't have gas masks with us at the time, but I would have liked to have had a gas mask on, even though it had been weeks since the bodies had been removed. As we went on through this large holding room, there was another room that had the furnaces, crematoriums.
There were about a dozen of these masonry furnaces, which looked like ceramic kilns. And they had the trotters that they laid the bodies on and pushed them into the kilns, then they'd rake the bodies off and pull them back out. I don't know how many of those they could cremate in one time. I went on down below this area, and the ashes of the people dropped out from below the kiln and they were just gathered together in a big hopper. They had little crock pots that looked like little flower pots, and they put these ashes in those little pots. We were told that they sealed these pots and these ashes were shipped to different relatives in different countries and they sold them for money, telling them these were the ashes of their relatives. But they were just anybody's ashes; they were all mixed up. One thing I can't forget is that large room. There were no bodies there, but you could see where the bodies had been packed in there to the ceiling, and there were pieces of scalp and skin sticking to the ceiling in front of us that you could still see. And it was very, very depressing. I never could forget that scene because I could see that those bodies had actually been stacked there. I knew they had been. We went on through, after we left the building, out to the different compounds. We saw different types of ways of disposing of people.
They had one area. They said that there were dogs and they would put these people in there with the dogs. There was also a wall which they called, I believe, the Execution Wall where they lined people up in front of the wall and then machine-gunned them. There was one young man there, a young child really.
He was probably a teenager. He had been liberated in the camp, and he said his parents, his whole family, had been killed in that camp. He stayed there; he didn't want to leave. He spoke as the guide, but he just wanted to stay there because that's where his folks were and he didn't want to leave. There were other people around that were more or less guides, and people who had been in camps. I didn't remember anybody specific. I guess we spent about six or eight hours there. I’m not sure.
Q: There was no question in your mind that this had been a real concentration camp, that people had been killed here, cremated here, their ashes had been disposed of?
A: Certainly no doubt about it. Q: It couldn’t have been faked.
A: No, no, it was all true. I don't know how people could disbelieve it for the facts had been presented.
Q: You are an architect today. Dachau was the first concentration camp that the Germans built, the first one, and then all the rest of them were modeled on it. I have been curious trying to find out where that design came from, and finally a Russian survivor told us that they came from the gulags that Stalin had set up in Russia in the 1920s. The Germans had gone over there in the days when they were friendly with the Russians, seen the way that the gulags, the concentration camps, were built, and came back and built that one as a model. So, what you were seeing was a plan that had already been worked out for control of the inmates, and the fences were electrified so that anybody who touched the fence would die almost instantly. And they evidently did have complete control because there was never rebellion. There was never an effort to break out of Dachau which was an interesting thing. They had a moat down one side. I think the water halfway went down one of these big wire fences.
A: I remember a ditch there. I don’t remember if there was water at the time.
Q: Were there any Germans being kept as prisoners of war or prisoners in Dachau? A: Not that I remember.
Q: By that time they had filled it up someplace in there. Someplace. I am not sure, historically, when it happened, but they had captured a whole bunch of POW Germans and they had put them in that camp. Just trying to control the Germans. This may have been by Christmas of 1945, or much later. Did you have a chance to notice the homes that were over on one side of Dachau? The Dachau area was a staging area for an SS Division, and that was their port, and they had served guarding part time when they were there and then they would go train and do something else. But there actually were hundreds of homes built for the officers and the sergeants, the ranking and enlisted men. They lived there.
Their families lived there, even when the men went to fight in Russia. Those families, those officers, the SS officers, were billeted in those homes. Those homes that were built for the SS officers still exist and they’re occupied by Germans today. It’s a peculiar twist to history.
A: I remember that there was...looked like a residential area. Q: That’s right. That was the area.
A: I knew that they had to billet the officers and men somewhere, but we weren't told anything about it at the time. I don't remember if we were. But they were very nice houses. It was in an area about 8 or 10 miles north of Munich I believe. I remember it and the surrounding area, but not with a lot of details.
Q: Did you see any other concentration camps? In Austria there was a thing called Mauthausen.
A: No. This was the only one I saw.
Q: It was over in Austria. We got a little booklet that one GI gave us of an auxiliary camp called Gunskirchen. Just about as awful as anything I’ve ever seen. If you want a copy of it I’ll give it to you.
A: I would like a copy.
Q: When did you finally get back to the states?
A: I came back in November of 1945. We were training to go to the Pacific, the 45th Division, and they dropped the atomic bomb, and we came back. I was discharged in December of 1945 at Ft. McPherson.
Q: You stayed here in Georgia?
A: I had about a three-week leave of absence at home after I came back. Then I came back and was discharged in December.
Q: At the time you saw Dachau and in reading the Stars & Stripes, did you realize that there were other inmates in that camp besides Jews?
A: Yes.
Q: Did they tell you how many priests and nuns and Protestant ministers and whole Jehovah’s Witnesses organization...?
A: They didn't tell us how many, but we knew there were different nationalities. Q: French and Romanians. Anybody.
A: Right.
Q: It wasn't just a Jewish concentration camp. A: Right.
Q: There really was everything. They told you that?
A: Yes. In fact, I don't believe we knew at first that there were so many Jewish people there. We thought they were political prisoners mainly.
Q: That's interesting.
A: Now, that was my opinion. I don’t really think anybody [unintelligible] Jewish. In fact, we had heard rumors about it, even when we were in combat. But until after the war was over, when we began to get the details and information on it and the information began to come together, we didn't know a lot about it, frankly.
Q: Was there ever any dilemma or question in your mind about the Germans doing something like you saw at Dachau? In other words, here is a great civilization that's supposed to have culture and music and religion and arts and all of a sudden there was Dachau which was a major upheaval experience.
A: Something from another world. At the time, we were so mentally programmed toward the Germans that we weren't particularly surprised. But after awhile, when you got the...for instance, we stayed in Austria several weeks after the war was over in Europe. We got to know the Austrians and some Germans, and they seemed just like regular people to us. I couldn't really imagine how they could do what they had done. Another GI and I got into a little bit of an argument about some local people. He was going to kick some people. We were at a gate between the French and the American sector, and these people wanted to go through to see some relatives, to take some animals and cows and things through. And he got sort of mean toward the people. He wanted to know what they were going to do, and he started fishing around. He said, "Look what these people have done.” And I said, "The same thing could happen to some of us maybe, if you happen to be in the wrong place at the time." But you find people everywhere that are made up the same way, and unless we have openness, know what is going on politically, this thing can happen here, in England, or anywhere. You have to know what people have on their minds and in their hearts, what kind of people they are, what they want to do to other people.
Q: We’ve got sixty Americans sitting over in... A: That’s right.
Q: Whatever. So, you do understand that the Holocaust could happen again. In fact, this Cambodia with the million people murdered....
A: Absolutely. Right. [Unintelligible.]
Q: Did you happen to see the Holocaust television series? A: Yes, I did.
Q: What did you think of the series?
A: I thought it was pretty accurate. Like any dramatic production, especially on television, or movies, or radio, you have actors who don't really always feel what had happened, so they have to act. You can't really make this a real thing. It’s actors, but I thought it portrayed the message very well. Anybody who really wanted to listen, and wanted to see what had happened, there was no question about getting the message.
Q: We are so grateful for your taking the time to come and tell the story. It is upsetting, it always is, always will be for some reason, but because you have this hurt, you are helping us all. We thank you so much.
