United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with George Pick
November 13, 1997
RG-50.106*0084
PREFACE The following interview is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
GEORGE PICK
November 13, 1997
Question: This is the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum interview with George Pick, conducted by Gail Schwartz on November 13th, 1997 in Arlington, Virginia. This interview is part of the museum’s project to interview Holocaust survivors and witnesses who are also volunteers with the museum. This is tape number one, side A. Could you give us your full name?
Answer: My name is George Steven Pick, p-i-c-k.
Q: Is that the name you were born with?
A: The first name is Anglicized. The original name was György, but I changed it when I became a citizen because nobody could spell it and pronounce it. George is an equivalent English version of György, which was my name.
Q: And your family name was Pick?
A: My family name was Pick, correct.
Q: And where were you born, and when were you born?
A: Yes, I was born in Budapest, Hungary, in March 28, 1934.
Q: Now let’s talk a little bit about your family. How long had they been in that area?
A: My family’s history had been quite intertwined with the Austro-Hungarian empire’s history. I have records which shows that my family was in Hungary for at least 250 years. I have actual birth certificates and – and other do – documents which document this. And I had a very large family. I did a little bit of genealogical research. It showed that I had roughly 250 family members in the empire. And I am saying this because when the empire broke up after this first World War, my family sort of stayed to – stayed in the geographical locations they were, but all of a sudden they were citizens of three different countries, Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Austria. And some of my relatives also lived in Transylvania, so they became Romanian. And this was the situation between the two wars. We were a fairly closely knit family. People were keeping in touch with each other. And I know, for example, of what my great-grandparents did. One was on my father’s side, a physician. And the other one on my father’s side was a merchant, an importer, who imported mostly fruits and spices. My grand – great-grandparents on my mother’s side, one owned a lumberyard, and the second one was a lawyer. And so I have quite a bit of – of information about them. My grandparents of – my maternal grandfather was an engineer, a mechanical engineer. Worked as chief engineer of a – of a factory in Hungary, and my grandmother was a housewife. My other grandfather was a director of a lumber company. My father was a – an engineer and my mother was a paralegal secretary. So that’s the background. I am an only child, I had no brothers or sisters. I have a number of cousins, I have a –
Q: What are your parents’ names?
A: My father’s original name was Istvan, which is translated roughly to Steven, and my mother’s name was Margit, which is Margaret; that’s what she Anglicized her name to when she came to this country.
Q: And her maiden name?
A: Her maiden name was Kornhauser, and that’s her father’s name. Her mother’s maiden name was Spitzer(ph). And my grandmother on my father’s side, her maiden name was Augenfeld(ph).
Q: And you said your father was an engineer, what kind of engineer?
A: He was a – a mechanical engineer, and he worked for a short time as such. Because of some of the Jewish laws, which came into effect in the late 30s, early 40s, he lost his job in January of 1939.
Q: Yeah, we-we’ll get to that in a moment, yeah. All right, you are born, you said, in 1934. Did – was your family living in the center of the city, or whereabouts?
A: Well, my family lived in Buda, which is the other side of the – the Danube river, and we lived there until I think I was about six or seven, and then we moved to Pest, my father, mother and I.
Q: Do you have any memories of Buda, living in Buda?
A: Yes, Buda is a very – very nice hilly section of the city. We lived near a – a large square, where – and a – and a hill, Gellért hill. And my mother took me, when I was a child, walking there to both the – the hill and the square. And I – I do remember very well the – th-the area.
Q: Was this a Jewish neighborhood?
A: No, it was not. There was a Jewish neighborhood in Pest, but not in Buda. And we did – we were very – we were not very religious. We were fairly – we – we were really –
Q: Assimilated?
A: Yeah, assimilated, I could say. And were not very conscious of – of living in a Jewish neighborhood, although we – we know that we are Jews, of course.
Q: Did your family have any kind of religious observance?
A: I th – we – we observed the high holidays, but that was about it. My father’s side of the family had a number of people who were – who married non-Jews, and they were, I would say, completely non-observant of any religion. A few of them had converted before the war, but most of them stayed Jewish, but were – were completely secular, I would say.
Q: Do you think you knew you were Jewish by the time you were six – up to the time you were six?
A: It’s an interesting story. When I was about four or five years old, my mother took me to a little gymnasium. The gymnasium, in an English sense, was in a Jewish high school, and we went there once a week. And the teacher was Jewish, and it was a little bit of a physical education type thing. And on the corner, just across the street from this high school, there was a – a Catholic church. And I always insisted that we should go into this church, because I liked the way people were – were praying there. My mother didn’t say anything, and we went there. However, on – by age six, my mother enrolled me into a Jewish elementary school, and by then I knew very well that I was Jewish. I was also sort of forced into the reality of being Jewish after my father lost his job and he told me that he lost it because we were Jews.
Q: What language did you speak at home?
A: Well, we spoke German, mostly my mother and father and grandparents. I would say they did, I didn’t. And they spoke it because they didn’t want me to understand certain things. I was taught German when I was in kindergarten, and I spoke fairly well for a few years, but then I’ve completely forgotten it. Hungarian was the main language, essentially.
Q: Was your father, or your parents in any way Zionists?
A: They were not. They were not Zionists at all. There was a – I had an uncle who came to the United States in the late 30s and he first wanted us to come, and sent papers. This was in 1940. Hungary was a neutral country until June of ’41, so people could theoretically at least, leave the country. My uncle, who was a physician when he emigrated, brought – took our papers and sent us some affidavits, but my father was very reluctant. He – he didn’t want to start again, and the un – my uncle was fairly discouraging as far as the possibilities of employment, because on – he was telling my father that he would be sort of a tradesman, maybe a mechanic. Well, my father was an engineer and a businessman and he didn’t want to step down the ladder, so we didn’t do anything. Then in 1940, he offered my mother that he would adopt me, and that he would take me, but my mother declined that offer. So, because of that, I got stuck in Hungary with my parents, of course.
Q: When was the first time that you remember hearing the name Hitler? Granted, you were very young in the 30s. Do you have any memories up til 1939 of your parents talking about this man, or what was happening, how conditions were changing?
A: I have very vivid memories in 1938 of Hitler, because Hitler speeches were broadcast in the radio, and I remember this frightening voice, and – and his yelling and screaming, and –
Q: And you were only four and a half.
A: Correct, but I remember it very vividly because it was frightening me. I mean, I didn’t understand the language, but the way he spoke was – was very frightening.
Q: Did you say anything to your parents, or do you remember them comforting you?
A: I don’t remember them comforting me, I think I – I said to my parents that – that this man was a very frightening person, the way he spoke. And we had [coughing] excuse me – we had a prime minister at the time who was also a great anti-Semite, and I remember – well, I don’t remember the – the speeches, but I do remember the kinds of – of expressions he – he – he used, which again, were – were frightening to me, although I was only a youngster. I was a fairly precocious child and I was well aware of some of the politic – political figures, Churchill, Roosevelt, Hitler and all this. And in fact, it was a sort of a joke in the family that people always ask me, you know, who was the Prime Minister of England, or who was the president of America, or whatever else, and I always knew the answer, even when I was in kindergarten. So I was sort of regarded as a smart kid, and I – I was more aware, probably, than an average four or five years old, about what was happening.
Q: Okay, let’s move now to 1939. Is that the year you said your father lost his job?
A: Yeah. In main of – May of ’39, when the second Jewish law came into effect, my father lost his job, but it was more than that, because that particular law, also allowed what they called people who were not trustworthy for the government. They allowed the government to induct them into labor brigades. And of course, these groups included communists and Jews. And because of that, a number of my uncles, and among them, my father as well, was impacted very shortly. Actually, 1940, my father was inducted into a labor brigade. And they took him to Carpathia-Ruthenia, which at that time was already occupied by Hungary. And they sent him to build roads, strategic roads in that area.
Q: When did you say he was taken away?
A: This – this was in – in September of 1940, 1940. And –
Q: What did he do between the time he lost his job, and being taken away?
A: Okay, between the time he lost his job and being taken away, many Jews figured a way to go around the – the laws. According to the laws, which were designed to squeeze the Jews out of the economic life of Hungary, a Jew could not practice business. But what they did, what the Jews did is they hired a Christian person who would then take out the business license, and they would work under him. And in our building where we lived, there was a super by name of George Dudek(ph) who was a very kind man. He was a friend of my f-father’s, and he volunteer – he – he essentially agreed with my father that he would take out the license, and of course my father paid him a stipend, and under this – with this arrangement, my father was able to – to do that – some business. Now, when I talk about business, it was not a f – it was not a formal store. What – what they have done, and this is a fairly interesting story, is they – they went to coffeehouses, and they met there Jews and non-Jews and they made business essentially on a handshake [indecipherable] and they sold them both things. My father, being an engineer was more familiar with engineering materials, so he – he sold scrap iron, scrap materials and bought – bought them as well. And he had some partners who were – and business partners who were both Christian and Jew, and that’s how he essentially made a living. And bet – and after ’39, he has done that for – for quite awhile. As you see, he came back after the 1940 induction, and then he was inducted another time. But between 1939 and 1944, he was home most of the time, and when he was home, he was doing this, he was practicing business.
Q: When you were very young, did you have non-Jewish friends?
A: I did. I remember one, I don’t remember his name. My grandparents had a little home – a little home, a little yard and a – a small bungalow, about 20 miles from Budapest, which we used, as well as some of my other relatives for summer – a summer cottage. And I remember in 1940 particularly in the summer of ’40, we went there. My mother and I stayed there for maybe a month, and my father came out on the weekends and we had some – I had some next door neighbors, little mini-farms, and kids came over, peasant children, and the – we played. And there was absolutely no talk about whether you were Jewish or you were not, they were just friends. And – and as I said, I had a number of them from that – it was a little village called Gerdaler(ph) and we had a next door neighbor, was a Serbian couple, and we were very friendly with them, and some others, also. The building we lived in in Pest had a few children. In fact, our next door neighbor had two girls, and the next door neighbor was a professional soldier. He was a – a – an officer in the army. And I was extremely friendly with their kids. I was – if I wasn’t home, I was there, and they sort of regarded me as – as a family member. When there was Christmas, they had a little gift for me under the Christmas tree. And I have a number of pictures with the – with the two girls. One was my age, and the other was a couple of years younger. The next neighbor next door was also very friendly. They – they had a – a girl who was my age as well. And the three girls and myself, we were almost inseparable friends in the age four to seven or eight, even up to 10. And again, there was very little, to me, was very little awareness of – of what’s the difference between a Jew and a non-Jew.
Q: So you’re saying you didn’t experience any anti-Semitic remarks at that time, during that interval?
A: I – I wouldn’t say that. What I was saying is that I did have non-Jewish friends. We had a number of anti-Semites in the building. And there was one incident which I remember very vividly. There was a teacher, who was a – quite an anti-Semite and he disliked me and I disliked him also, and once he asked me something, and I sort of a smart-alecky answer and he gave me a big slap on the face. And I – that was the first time I have ever ha-had – even my parents didn’t do things like that to me, and I was very upset. And the interesting end of this story was that a couple of years – couple of days later, this fellow came over and apologized to me that he did this, that he shouldn’t have. But I know that his feelings were not very friendly. But he –
Q: Do you think that’s because you were Jewish?
A: I am almost positive that that was the case, that because I was Jewish.
Q: How do you know that?
A: Well, I think he was a member of some sort of a Hungarian Nazi party. And he was certainly – he was the warden, the air raid warden there, and he was very gung-ho on – on the war. This was the first year of the war, when this whole thing happened, in 1941, and I know that he was – he was nationalist at least. But I – I – I always had the feeling that he was also an anti-Semite.
Q: What was it like for you as a young child to have your father tell you that he lost his job, his work, because he was Jewish? Do you remember what your reaction was at the time?
A: Well, I – I don’t – I don’t remember what my reaction was, but I remember when he lost his job. I do not recall whether it was a panic time or not. But he has lost his job many times during the – the depression, and he always found something to do, and somehow to make a living. He was a man who could make a living on a – in Antarctica probably as well. He was a very ingenious person.
Q: So you don’t remember feeling particularly threatened in 1939 because you were Jewish? A: I did not feel threatened economically, but as I said, I had this – I mean, I heard Hitler and I heard the prime minister of Hungary speak and yell. I certainly was frightened by this. Maybe I was not completely conscious as to what could happen. But just the – the voices were disturbing.
Q: What kind of relationship did you have with your parents? Was it a very close one, did you feel you could talk to them?
A: My relationship with my parents at this time was close to my mother and not very close to my father. My father was a fairly cold person. He was not a kind of a person who would – would color, or who would tell me that he loves me, or something. And he was not a kind of a person who would want to take me to places. There was always a great disagreement between my mother and father as to how to bra – how to bring me up. My father felt that my mother was coddling me too much. He called it a monkey love, and he wanted to make a man out of me, and he felt that I was just too soft. And over the years, this – this translated into a – a fairly distant relationship between myself and my father. Even later in my years, I – he felt that I – I just did not meet his expectations in terms of physical prowess. My family, particularly my father’s family had a number of gymnastic champions and – and great sportsmen. My uncle was an Olympic – he was a European champion of gymnastics and seven times Hungarian champion. And both my aunt and my uncle on my father’s side were attending the Los Angeles Olympics. My uncle also went to the Amsterdam Olympics and Stockholm Olympics as a – as a part of the Olympic team of Hungary. And with that, of course, with that kind of competition, no, I was – was not able to compete. My father was, in his younger days, pretty physically active. In his 40s he was not as active as he was earlier. But he expected me to follow his footsteps and his brother’s footstep, who was a – a great skier and mountain climber, and I was never able to fulfill these kind of things, so he sort of gave up on me on that.
Q: Now you said that your family moved away. Was it in 1939, from Buda to Pest. Why did they move?
A: If I remember correctly, in Buda they lived with my mother – maternal grandparents. This was right after they got married, and they really could not afford to live apart. In the late 30s, they had improved the financial conditions where my father beg – was working for a couple of years there, and I guess they were able to afford to move away. They didn’t want to move into a very expensive neighborhood, first they moved into a – a fairly low – middle class neighborhood. But then later, in 1940, me – we moved into an upper class place in – in Buda – in Pest, in – which at that point was sort of considered a suburbs.
Q: And when did you start school?
A: I started school in September of 1940, and I went to a Jewish elementary school. It’s called the Jewish Boys’ Orphanage, but it was not just an orphanage, it was an elementary school for other children. And it wasn’t even for boys only, it was a coed school. So we had about 30 students, I guess 20 boys and 10 girls.
Q: Why did you go to a Jewish school?
A: Well, there were several reasons for that. One of it is that school was considered very good, and at that point I think my parents became aware that I should be more aware of my – my Jewishness. And so they decided that this was a – a good school for me. And indeed it was. I had met children, both girls and boys, who were – essentially who became lifelong friends. In fact, I still have a number of them here in this country, whom I known since age six from first elementary school. And so it was a – a – a great bond, as it turned out. We had a great teacher Arn(ph) Magda(ph) who was a – a young woman at the time. And I remember the school as a very friendly school, and as a very friendly place to – to go to. I also remember that my mother took me every ni – every day. The school was about a half an hour walking distance from where li – where we lived. And I always woke up late. Actually, my mother didn’t have the heart to wake me up early enough, so that we ended up running all the time. And – and she – I remember very well that she always had my – hand my – held my hand, and we ran through this city park to get to the school. And I also remember the other teachers, other than just Arn(ph) Magda(ph).
Q: In the early 40s, did you – or even in late 30s, did you notice any refugees from other countries coming to Budapest? Jews from Germany, Poland, Austria?
A: Yes. Actually, they were some of my relatives who were able – there was one uncle, his name was Gustie – Gustav. He lived in Vienna, and after the anschluss he was arrested, and they took him to Dachau. And for – and I am not sure and I don’t remember how, but after about a year and a half in Dachau, he was let go, and he managed to slip over the border to Hungary, and became an illegal alien. And I remember him very well. He – we used to have a family gathering in my matern – paternal grandmother’s and grandfather’s house. They had a little house, and it was a family tradition that we got together every Sunday afternoon. My cousins, my aunts, uncles and ourselves. And I remember Uncle Gustie came at that time and he was telling us stories about the camp, and his life. And we sort of didn’t believe him very much. He was a very nice man. I didn’t realize it until after the war that he was a multimillionaire who at the end did not survive, and who left all his houses for nobody. Ma – on my mother’s side, there were several great-aunts and children and – who lived in Bratislava. And I remember Ileanor(ph) and her – her 16 year old boy Garbore(ph) and her husband, they were able to slip across the Danube in 1942. And they lived again as illegal refugees in Hungary. We, between 1942 and 1944 were able to hide them. It will – this follows, we had a fairly large family in Budapest. They – every night they slept somewhere else. And so every week or week and a half, we were the ones who were hiding them, and my mother and grandmother were particularly fairly nervous when they slept in our house. Had – they had some papers, but they were not very good.
Q: Was this nervousness conta-contagious? You were eight and nine years old when this was going on, and if so, how did it manifest itself?
A: Nervousness was contagious in a sense that I was aware that these people were – were illegals, that they came out of horrible things. We knew about the ghetto.
Q: How did you know?
A: Well, they were telling us about the ghetto, they were there, and the – and that people went into hiding, into forests, and also the – that they were di – taken away.
Q: All this was believed?
A: All this was not believed very much. We – we didn’t think they were lying, but we certainly didn’t think that it could happen to us. And so, although we were nervous about their status, and we obviously were family, and we helped them as much. There was, for example, one uncle who – who was a very nice guy. He was – his name was Louie, and he was a very religious Catholic al – although he was not born Catholic, he was a Jew who converted. And he was a great family man, and he was the one who got false papers to these people. Somebody – and I do not know who and why and how, betrayed him, and he went to jail for six months, because he not only helped the relatives, he helped other people in getting false papers. At that time, there were approximately 10,000 Polish and che – Czechoslovakian Jews living illegally in ha – in Hungary. Hungary at that time was regarded as some sort of a haven, a safe haven for – for Jews. Again, the Hungarian government sort of knew about their existence and tolerated them, but that they were still illegal and they had very little possibilities of – of doing anything. They couldn’t work, they were essentially charity cases for the – for their families.
Q: In 1942 and 1943, did you notice any rise in anti-Semitic incidents on the street, or to you personally?
A: Yes. The – in 1943, there was an interesting incident, which really brought home the frightening reality. My father was – as I mentioned, my father was inducted in 1940 to Carpathia-Ruthenia working on strategic roads. He was let go three months later, and in 1943, he was inducted again. This time he was taken to Kluge, Transylvania. Koloszvár, which is a – was again, part of the occupied territories by Hungary. He was doing some roadwork there as well. We visited him, because we had some relatives who lived there, in Kluge, and we the – I remember very well that he was quite lucky, because his commander was a decent man. His name was Andoor(ph) Altoi(ph), and he was a very humane person. He recognized this whole thing as being really ludicrous. And they – the – the men were able to, for example, organize groups. Some of them we – more well-to-do men paid money into a fund to get furloughs, and that money went to the families of the destitute. And the – the man who ran, Altoi(ph) who ran this – this brigade, this labor brigade allowed this to happen, and he did not allow the lower, non-com officers to – to hit the Jews or – or – or do any kind of inhumane things. So in that respect, my father was quite lucky in that. After he was deactivated, which was in the summer of 1942 – three –
Q: Let’s back up. What’s it like for a nine year old to see his father in a – you know, taken away and having to do this kind of work?
A: Well, we had a family tradition, we never went to – to the railroad station. We always said goodbye at home. And it was a very traumatic experience, of course, he – I remember his rucksack, his – his thing, he carried his things with him and he bought good shoes and things. And it was – we were always terribly distraught, because of course, we never knew how long my father would be taken, or if we would ever see him again. It never – it’s sad, you know, you are inducted, and you have to go to such and such a place within 48 hours. But we never knew what his destination was. And then, of course, when we heard from him, when he was taken to a – to Transylvania, it took roughly a month before we knew where he was.
End of Tape One, Side A Beginning Tape One, Side B
Q: This is a continuation of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum interview of George Pick. This is tape number one, side B, and you were talking about when you would say goodbye to your father at the railroad station. And then you had also mentioned – when he was taken away – and then you had also mentioned that you and your mother came to visit him one time, and I was just asking what it was like for a young boy to see his father in that position.
A: Yes, as I mentioned to you, our – our family tradition was that we were not – we – we never went to the railroad station, we said goodbye at home and then he went to the railroad station himself. I – I like to step back in time, in 1942, because it was very important and a very traumatic one. In April of ’42, when 50,000 Hungarian Jewish slave laborer servicemen were inducted, men between the ages of 18 and 40 were inducted and they were taken to Ukraine. Among these were three of my uncles. My moth – my father was lucky because he was one year too old to be inducted, but my three uncles weren’t. And I want to mention that there was a very large catastrophe which happened to them as well as to the 50,000, as well as 200,000 Hungarian army personnel in January of 1943. There was an offensive in the middle of the f – winter in the Don – bend of the Don river in the Ukraine, where the Soviet army had a counteroffensive and they – in six days they wiped out 200,000 Hungarian army men, and 50,000 Jewish slave laborers; among them, two of my uncles died.
Q: What were their names?
A: Their name was – one was Bondi(ph) Kornhauser, and the other one was Yanu(ph) Pick. And two of my other uncles, Lazlo Kornhauser and Lazlo Pick survived. We did not know that they did, but – but in fact, they did. And they came home about a year and a half later, but the other ones died. And many friends whom we knew who went, did not come back at that point. So I wanted to mention that. I also wanted to mention that we found out late in 1942 that the German government asked the Hungarian government to implement the Final Solution in budap – in Hungary, and the Hungarian government refused at that point. And this, of course, was a – was a great relief for us, and we really believed that the Hungarian government is – is not going to let us go. We did not know what happened to the rest of – of European Jews. We were completely ignorant. And it is interesting because my father and I and my mother listened to the BBC every day, and there was very – there was a lot of news about the war, how the war went, and I remember very well that we had a big map at home, and my father had pins, red pins and white pins and we always looked at the – th-the map, and they were telling us where the – the offensives were, or what kind of battles, and my father was a – a vivid follower of all this. And there was a Hungarian speaking colonel on BBC, who spoke not very good Hungarian, very accented Hungarian, but he was the – the war correspondent, and he was the one who talked about all this, and we were very – very much listening to what was happening. There was no word, to my knowledge, which said anything about camps, or labor camps or deportation, or what happened to the Jews. Was very little, or nothing, nothing to my recollection. And in 1943 when – when this [indecipherable] breakthrough occurred, was a great sadness in Hungary. And I think that even the Jews, of course, felt sad because they knew how many Jews were killed. And as I mentioned, my next door neighbor was a – was an army officer, and my father and they – and he very often spoke about the – how the war was going. Now Hungary, of course, was a Nazi ally, and I – today I – I – to-today I – I – I wonder, you know, this man, he really had a great amount of goodwill, because he could denounce my father. I mean, my father was trying to convince him that the Germans lost the war in 1943, and in the beginning of ’44. And this man, of course he di – he – he – he talked to my father, but I mean, this was a very dangerous thing my father was doing, and this man was really decent enough not to – not to do anything. On the other hand, I remember another man who lived in our building, who was a commander of a Jewish brigade, who took this Jewish brigade to the Ukraine. And when he came home on furlough, he was very proud of the fact that among his Jewish slave laborers, there were a number of extremely Orthodox Hassidim whose beard he personally cut and shaved and taught them the delights of eating pork. And this man, by name of Drexell(ph), he was – Drexler(ph) rather, he was very proud of this.
Q: What was his first name?
A: I – I do not remember his first name, but I remember his last name. and he was much frightened after the war, because he knew that he made all these statements, and he was particularly frightened when he – when we returned, and he thought we would denounce him; we did not. Going back to 1943, my father was deactivated, and after that we went to a – take a – a week – one week vacation to the mountains. And it was a – a luxury hotel, and Jews were allowed to go there. There was only one hotel, which was not open to Jews, which was open to army personnel, army officers actually. And it was a beautiful summer and we enjoyed ourselves very much. One afternoon, my mother and I took a walk in the woods. And there, in the woods, we saw a large group of men in Nazi uniforms. They were the Hungarian Nazis, called the Nyilas, and they had the rally there. And that was the first time we really saw these people, and they were yelling and screaming and we were really frightened. And we sort of managed to slip away, but – but this really sort of banged reality to our consciousness in terms of – well, here these people, we – we thought these people were underground wi – they were e – theoretically illegal, they were not allowed. Their leader was in jail, but yet they were organizing and they were meeting in these places out in the mountains, in faraway places from Budapest, and – and we became more aware that these people were real. I mean, we – we – we knew the propaganda, we knew that these people existed, but this was my firsthand encounter with them.
Q: What’s it like to see someone in a uniform like that when you’re nine years old?
A: Well, it was quite frightening. We – we understood, and I understood what the uniform stood for, and –
Q: How did you understand? You’re nine years old.
A: Well, I have seen a lot of propaganda leaflets, and they have, all over the city they had these – these big propaganda photographs and – about the war effort and how the – these people look in SS uniform, how did the Hungarian uniform look and how did this Hungarian Nazi uniform look. Particularly the one which we were well aware is the armband which they wore, which were red and white stripes with a – a large Arrow Cross in the middle, green Arrow Cross. And we – we were – we recognized that. And as I said, it’s just the way they behaved was frightening enough and what they were yelling, slogans, all this kind of things. They were mostly nationalistic and racial slogans, and they were yelling slogans, you know, death to the Jews and all that. And of course that was quite, even at age nine, it was quite clear to me that these people were not our friends.
Q: And how did your parents interpret this to you?
A: Well, we didn’t talk very much about it. I knew that my mother was very frightened, and we sort of left, and we tried to sort of not to speak about this. We thought – we didn’t ignore it, because I remember it, but we did not want to – she didn’t want to emphasize that, look, these people are terrible, and we are going to have terrible times. We really hoped at that point that the war is turning, that we will be able to survive. That before anything would happen, the war would be over.
Q: So it’s 1942 - ’43, and you are still going to this Jewish school?
A: Yes.
Q: And then what is the next big change that you remember?
A: Well, the – the – the next big change, what I remember was that in 19 – end of 1943, beginning of 1944, my mother decided that I am now old enough to learn a little bit about music and culture. And next door we had a lady who happens to be Jewish – happened to be Jewish, and who was a violin teacher. And we went there – actually it was maybe 1943 when I started violin lessons. And I never got too far, but what I did get out of it was a love of music. And I remember that in 1943, my mother decided that we were going to buy some season’s tickets for a musical and opera performances. All the Jewish performers were thrown out from their jobs in 1940 - ’41. And in Budapest, in the Jewish community center, there was a cult – there was a – like a hall, culture hall. Small hall.
Q: This is in Pest?
A: In Pest. In [indecipherable] 12, and it’s called the Goldmark Hall in memory of Karl Goldmark, who was a Jewish composer. And curiously and – and ironically enough, the people who were thrown out for the first class, the best singers, the best musicians. And so what they did, in order to make a living, they essentially organized their orchestra, and organized their – an opera company. And almost daily they had concerts and opera performances, and it was a very vibrant and I would – should say a better quality of performance than in the opera house. So my mother bought tickets, and I remember that my first opera, which I saw, was Rossini’s “Moses.” And I saw a number of operas, Faust. And we had opera tickets like once e-every two weeks, on Sundays. And we had opera tickets for “The Queen of Sheba,” which was a Karl Goldmark opera for the – on the 20 – on the 19th of March, for the 19th of March. And it was a sort of a birthday present for me because my birthday’s the 28th of March. So, we never went. Why didn’t we? Because on the morning of the 19th, the Germans came in, and the performance was postponed indefinitely. The school went on for a couple of more – I think maybe a week or so.
Q: The Germans came in, what do you remember about that day? Can you talk about March 19th?
A: Yes, I remember the Germans came in, the tanks came in and it was very frightening.
Q: What do tanks look like to a 10 year old?
A: Huge. I remember the Tigers, they were – they were unbelievably big. The Tiger tanks were the – the largest German tanks. And I remember, as they rumbled through the city, and the street – we lived in a s – on a street which sort of led into the center of the city. It was a wide street, and it was very much – it had streetcars, but it ha – it had enough room for tanks. I remember also 12 years later in 1956, when the Russian tanks rumbled on the same street, toward the center of the city. But on that 19th of March, it was absolutely frightening because we did not know what was going to happen. We knew that something terrible had happened. We heard the radio, and it was, you know, every hour on the hour there were more things, saying, you know, orders given to various units. Hungarian units do this, you know, fari – code words or code numbers, you know, 12th Hungarian division, be alert, or bring – bring yourselves to whatever city, and so forth. And what I remember is the confusion, and the – the disbelief that this could happen to us, and the – an-and the belief that – that now, something which we didn’t think would happen, will. And of course, the optimist would say well, you know, what can the Germans do? The Germans came in because – we know why they came in, because the Russians are pushing the German army toward the west and the Germans want to make sure that the – the German army has a retreat, you know, it wants to make sure that – that – that it could retreat. We also knew somewhat earlier that the Hungarian government was already discussing peace feelers with – with the Brits, and that that government was quite liberal and looked the other way. Well, that all changed on that day. In three days a new government was sworn in, Döme Sztójay, who was a – p-prior to this was the – the ambassador of Hungary to Berlin. And he was essentially a – an – he – he didn’t speak very good Hungarian, he was a German himself. There were these Germans in the west side of Hungary, groups of Germans living there, we called them Schwabs. They were the – th-the ethnic Germans, and Sztójay was one of them. And his government was containing the extreme Nazi elements. The only thing which was relatively heartening to us is that the – that Horthy, who was the head of the government, stayed. Now, we found out that Horthy was out of the country, and – but he came back later that afternoon. He was with Hitler, and of course that was the trick Hitler used; while Horthy was out, that’s when the – they came. We also found out that a couple of days later, that Eichmann and company also showed up in Budapest. The reason why I know this is that my mother had an uncle who was a very prominent lawyer, and who was still practicing law in 1943. And the reason why he was – were two reasons. One is that he was a World War I hero, a very decorated captain of the Austro-Hungarian army, and he was exempt from Jewish law. And secondly, he was a good friend of the German ambassador, Jakov. Well, Jakov left, Veesenmeyer came in. And va – before Jakov left, he told my Grand-uncle Paul, Paul Kornhauser, whose son was lost in Voronezh, that Paul, things are changing. But Paul was a Germanophile all his life, a-an admirer of Germany. Never really believed that anything could happen to him. He was a prominent Jew. He was not very religious, but he was very active in the Jewish community. Many of the Jewish leaders told him that he’s on a list, that he should go into hiding. Well, he didn’t. In fact, when he got his summons, the first one ha – Eichmann did the same thing as he did everywhere else, he’s – he summoned the prominent Jewish leaders the first three days or four days after this occupation, to a – a interim camp, and my uncle, my great-uncle took his dress uniform, his Hungarian dress uniform with all his medals and went in and demanded to be exempted from all these things. Well, they didn’t exempt him at all. In fact, they – they captured him and in a week, he and a hundred prominent Jewish leaders were sent to Auschwitz and he died there. So we knew that things are happening. We also knew that by the fifth of April – on the 28th of March, my 10th birthday came out a – the law that we must wear the yellow stars in a week. So by the fifth of April we all wore the yellow stars. That was sort of my 10th birthday present.
Q: How does it feel to wear a yellow star?
A: Well, it – it certainly was – was something different. I was not very easy to accept that now everybody knows that I am different. I mean, up until now I – people the – we – we lived in a house where – in a building where two or three Jewish families lived, the rest of them were not. This was not a – an issue, I mean, although anti-Semitism we knew about, but as I said, there were a number of Christians who were friends, and sympathetic. But now, this was a – a – a huge sign on one’s coat. It was easy to see who was. And of course, we did not know who the – the – the enemies were. Whom, we didn’t know. And it was –
Q: Were you – were you unhappy about being Jewish?
A: No, I was not unhappy being – being Jewish. No, at that part – time, I was already very consciously Jewish. We had the Bible studies and Hebrew in – in elementary school, and I was much more conscious about being Jewish.
Q: Would you have preferred to be something else? I’m talking as a 10 year old.
A: Oh I cert – I would have preferred to be not there, so – for sure, but I don’t know. I – I would say that I was – I was a proud Jew. I w – I was – probably wouldn’t prefer to be anything but a Jew, but I certainly would have preferred to be not a Jew who is – who is going to be sent to the slaughterhouse. And what – what happened there in the – on the same day when we started to have to wear this Jewish star, my father and other Jewish men from 18 to 60 were inducted again. So essentially, my mother, my grandmother and I stayed behind, and my grandparents.
Q: Did your mother sew on the Jewish star on your clothes?
A: Yes, and I remember that – that it was in the newspapers, you know, they were – they were telling us exactly how big is has to be, and how yellow and y-you – you could buy this material, but it cannot be orange, it has to be very lemon yellow, and it has to be this big and this wide and all these things. And I remember how we – we were cutting it on the – on the table, on the dining room table, these things and we were counting how many we need for the outer garments and inner garments, and it was a – and then my mother and grandmother were sewing it. And we had to wear it on the – right above our hearts on the left side. But what was really traumatic was – is as I said, is my father had to leave again, and this time, of course, what do we do? And we didn’t hear from him for a long while, and about a month or so later, we heard rumors that the – that the Jews in the countryside – and I had 150 relatives – are starting to be gathered into ghettos. And there was an interesting things which happened, which was another lost opportunity. My mother’s family had a friend, and his – he was a – a romane – he was – he was a Romanian, or he lived in Romania, but he was Hungarian. And he came to Budapest in April, middle of April, and came to my mother and said –
Q: 1944.
A: Ninte – 1944, correct. And he said to her, he said, look, things in Romania are come and gone. I’ll take George with me, and he’ll be safe with me. My mother refused. So this was another missed opportunity. And then he went and we never heard of him afterwards. We n – we don’t know what happened to him and his family. But he is a – he was an old friend, and he was a trustworthy friend. But, whether it would have been better for me to go with him, or not, who knows? Obviously, in the final [indecipherable] I was okay at the end. That happened in April. We didn’t hear about my relatives except these rumors, and these rumors were getting more and more disturbing. Then we had a lot of different rules and regulations. We had to submit our radio, our bicycles, our telephone. And we were cut off from the world, because we had no radio, for example. So we didn’t know what was going on.
Q: You had to give up your own bicycle?
A: I – I – I had to give up my bicycle, I had to give up my – our radios, jewelry.
Q: What that difficult for you as a 10 year old, to give up your bicycle?
A: Yes, I did. I would say yes. I – I – it was difficult, and probably more difficult was the radio, because it was a lifeline for us. And –
Q: What were you and your other 10 year old friends talking about? Did you used to talk about the war, or did you just talk about typical children’s things?
A: Oh, we would – we talk more – more about typical children’s thing, in the school. The school was abruptly ending. By the middle of April, we had no school, it was all finished. It was the – I completed the fourth grade, I got my paper saying that I completed the fourth grade and – and the Jewish kids no longer were allowed to go to school. I remember the fi – about two weeks after we had the – the red – the yellow star on us, we still went to school, but then it was over and they told us that we should come in October to rigi – to register for the gymnasium, for high school. October was not a good time to register that year, unfortunately. At home, there were just too many things happening. We were listening – the radio we couldn’t listen to, but they had these – these announcements which they mounted on the walls. And every day there was 20 - 30 different things, you know. We were rushing around and we were trying to make sure that we have food at home, we were –
Q: These are loudspeakers on the street, or in the buildings?
A: They were – they were newspaper, mostly the newspaper was used. There was one thing which I remember in April; my father was still there, before they took him. It was the first raid on Budapest, bombing – bombing raid. And my grandfather, as I mentioned, on my father’s side, who lived with my aunt, whose husband was also inducted into the Ukraine, they lived in a small house, not too far from where we lived. And in this particular raid, their house was hit. We didn’t know this, but my father, after the raid was over, went – was worried and went over to see what happened. And it turned out that they were in the basement, and except for my aunt, who got hit by something in the face, and bleeding, the grandparents were okay, and there was also a cousin. So all – all of them were brought, my mother, my father brought them over. And my aunt was bleeding. Her name was Elizabeth. And in our building, there was a doctor. And he was visiting – actually was not living there, but he visited his sister and his mother, who lived there. They were ethnic Germans, and he was an – an SS officer. And I don’t know how and why so naively my father and mother went over to him, and asked him to help, give first aid help to my – to my aunt. So, rather naively my father went down to ask this SS doctor to help my aunt. I was there with him, and – with my aunt. And this man – I never forget his expression, he had very light blue eyes, and the amount of hatred which – which came out, was incredible and indescribable. What he said, I’d never forget, he says, you dirty Jews, you think I will help you? He says, you will – you will die just your brothers and sisters did, very soon. And then took and slammed the door in front of our faces. And I was completely flabbergasted, and I was surprised and shocked by this. We knew his mother and his sister for years. They lived – they were just a couple of – lived a – lived just a couple of doors away from where we were. They were never very friendly people, but I – we never realized that, you know, how much of a Nazi they were and he was. In fact, one of the interesting side – not interesting, tragic, I should say, was that he also at that time – I found out later on that he was bragging that he himself killed 20 Jews. He was one of the Nazi doctors who did experiments apparently, in the camps. I don’t know what happened to him after the war. I know that his mother and his sister survived and stayed there.
Q: Their names?
A: I – I wish I could tell you the names. I – I – I – I wrote down the names, but I don’t have it in my head. It starts with an H. A-As – if I remember, I – I’ll – I’ll let you know later. But that was right before my father was taken away in – in the middle of April. Once my father was taken, and as I mentioned, we were in a – in a panic every day because they had pages and pages of new regulations and orders, which in – which affected us. What we have to – what we cannot use, what we have to give in, and then finally, when we heard these rumors about what happened to the – the Jews in the provinces – you know, these were just slight rumors, and then we got – but we were very busy then, because we – we got the order that we have to vacate our apartment, and we have to move into these special Jewish houses.
Q: Can we just back up a little bit? Do you think your parents ever considered getting, as some people tried to do, getting a baptismal certificate? Do you think they ever thought about that?
A: Well, I know that my father never thought of it. My mother, in April heard that if you get a baptismal certificate, you may be exempt from something, and she talked to my father about it, and my father said, well, go ahead if you want to do it; I am not going to do it. And I remember that she and I went a couple of times, maybe twice, to a convent not too far from where we lived, where we had these – they call them white sisters. White sisters’ convent. And they were giving a group of Jews lessons about the catechism. And we went, I think, maybe twice, and then my mother saw the futility of it, and she said no, forget it. So –
Q: Did it bother you to do that?
A: It – it didn’t bother me to do it. I didn’t understand the catechism at all. I couldn’t understand what – it was like Chinese to me. But – but the – the sisters were kind, and it was – if it were something which would really help, I would say why – why not to do it? I mean, a lot of people did it. It turned out that – that conversions did not help at all. My – my uncle, who was converted because he believed in Catholicism, by the Primate of Hungary in the early 30s, and who went to church every Sunday, was inducted as a Jew, because both his parents were Jewish and he was Jewish and his conversion was too late, and the only difference between him and my father was that he wore a white armband while my father wore a yellow armband. And – but he got the same treatment, in fact worse, and he ended up in Auschwitz and he was gassed. So we knew that – that conversions were, at that point, ineffective, but when in – when you are in a situation like this, you try anything and everything you can. But it always struck me and it always stayed with me, that despite of the fact that my father was – I don’t think he had gone into a synagogue a half a dozen times in his last 20 years of his life, he still would refuse to do this, and that he was very much of a – a – a Jew. But he allowed us to, if he wanted to, they gave us this – this – this choice. So, what happened to us then, May came, and we got the – the order that we have to move. And we moved in June, toward the end of June. We were not allowed to take any furniture with us, only beds, and only the most crucial clothing.
End of Tape One, Side B Beginning Tape Two, Side A
Q: This is a continuation of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum interview with George Pick. This is tape two, side A.
A: It was June 17 when –
Q: 1944.
A: – 1944 when we had the, essentially the deadline to move. And my grandmother, myself and my mother moved in – in with my grandmother’s younger sister, who lived about two or three blocks away.
Q: How did you get the order? How did they notify you?
A: Well, they – they – they notified by – via newspaper, essentially everybody – the newspapers came out, as I mentioned, with many, many orders every day. And repeated deadlines, you know, when you have to move out and what houses are available and so forth. So it was av – a lot of bureaucratic – but very fast. I mean, the time the deadlines were days instead of weeks or months. And it was quite lucky for us that we had, in this apartment house where we moved to, we had several relatives living there, on Columbus Street. We lived in Elizabeth Street, which was a main street. Columbus Street was like a side street.
Q: Did you take anything special with you from your own apartment?
A: Yes, I – I took some toys; not very many, because there was just no room for that, because we moved into a two room place. The si – the three of us occupied one room, and my grandmother’s sister, her daughter, and the – and her daughter’s brother occupied another room. And then we had a meet – or ev – or almost every apartment had a maid room – maid’s room over the kitchen. And they took a single woman there, so she was the seventh person living in a two room place. And the only thing we could take is a – is essentially our beds. And I remember, the room was not that ver – large, and it was wall to wall beds. We had nowhere to eat, or we had to sit on a sofa bed to eat, essentially. And this was the – as I said, the 17th of June, and we heard rumors that things are happening in the countryside. We did not know precisely what.
Q: Were these houses marked in any way?
A: They were – they had the large yellow star, as if to tell people that this – this is a building where, you know, Jews live, or lepers live, whatever you want. There was one apartment which was occupied by a Christian family. The man was the super of the apartment, his name was Mr. Vargo(ph), Janus(ph) Vargo(ph). He was a decent fellow, and as you will hear, the – his actions were quite crucial in saving our lives; both my grandmothers and the relatives there, and my mother’s and mine. We settled in, essentially in the last week of June. There were a few young people, I was the youngest kid, there were no kids. There were a few teenagers, mostly older people. And almost daily, toward the end of June, we started to have to go down to the air raid shelter, because of air raids. I remember one particular day very vividly, and that was July the second, 1944; it was a Sunday. And even before, I was always worried about air raids, because evas – ever since the April air raid, ever since my aunt was hurt, I was afraid. And I remember once Mr. Vargo(ph) [indecipherable] was on the second of July, he – after everybody was ordered to the air raid shelter, he took me upstairs to the – just to the street level, to show me how beautiful those airplanes are. And they were, I mean, indeed, huge airplanes coming in, hundreds of them. And I – I can never forget the – the tremendous number. I mean, they almost covered the sky. And we were out there maybe one or two minutes, and then I said no, I don’t want to stay there, I want to go downstairs. So we did. And we sat there very quietly for about 10 minutes and then all of a sudden we heard this tremendous crash. At first is a whistling sound, a crash and the whole building shook up. And I started to scream and everybody else did too, and my mother sort of put my – my head against her – her bosom and trying to put her hands again – in my – on my ears so that I wouldn’t hear this. And a few minutes later another, even larger sound, and it was like an earthquake. And we saw – we had these blast do – doors leading to the outside, and – and it’s – this – this is a very heavy steel door. And along the door you see this brilliant light coming in. Of course, by then the electricity was gone, and we were sitting in the pitch dark. And – and this – this was like – like hell. And it went on for three hours, and we had four more very close hits, and we didn’t think that we were going to survive, and then we did. And after three hours we came up, and what we saw was incredible. We had – this building was a three story apartment building. It was sort of stood by itself. About a hundred yards behind it, there was a six story apartment building, which was hit. And the only thing – and it was a Jewish house, with the same yellow star like we did. The only thing which stayed up there was one fire wall, and everything was down on – in a big heap, and people were dead. Across the street there was a villa, a private home, before the raid. Afterwards, there was just a huge crater in the – crater in the – on the – on the – on the earth, and you could see body parts. You could see hands and legs and [indecipherable]. And this – the right side had four tennis courts, nothing but a big crater. And the left side was a – just a vacant lot, and a crater. So essentially, within a hundred yards of the building, we had four huge bombs hit. And I could almost feel even today this – this smell of – of – of death there and – and – and everything was smoking, and it was blackened, and purple, the sky was purple. And some people were optimists. I – I just can’t believe that people said well, maybe this is the end. Maybe – maybe this was used as a – as a camouflage to – to drop paratroopers here, and maybe the Brits and the Americans are here, and we will be coming – we’ll be freed. And of course, that was not the case at all. What was the real story was that it was the first carpet bombing of Budapest, and 30 percent of the city went – was in ruins, and the Jews were blamed for it. And –
Q: How are the Jews blamed for it?
A: Well, the propaganda, I mean, the – the radios were blaring that it was a Jewish conspiracy, that Jews left their lights on their buildings to show where the – where the city was, because of course we had blackouts at – at night. Well, blackou – and – and of course, if you were caught with any kind of light seeping through, that was a punishable – death punishable offense. And when – we were very careful looking around all the time, to make sure that there is no light, because we were accused of – of spying, too.
Q: Was this the first time you had seen dead bodies?
A: It was. Actually, these kind of dead bodies. There was one dead body I saw a few days before this. And this happened because there was a pharmacist who lived in our building and who poisoned himself, he committed suicide, and I saw him.
Q: This was a Jewish pharmacist?
A: Jewish pharmacist who lived there, and I saw him being taken away in a stretcher and he was – his hands were – I didn’t see his face because it was turned, but his hands were yellow and were sort of hanging down from the stretcher. And that was the first dead body. But the number of dead bodies after this raid, they were – they were really huge. And the first time that I saw this kind of – it’s not just dead, I mean, they were bloody. It was – was – was – was like hell.
Q: How does a 10 year old process something like that?
A: Well, I was absolutely frightened. After this, every t-two – twice a day, all regular like clockwork, at 11 o’clock in the morning, the – the westerns allies came, and then nine o’clock at night the Russians came in bombing raids. And every time this happened, my mother had a huge pillow, which she put on my head. And to show you how traumatic it was, it took 30 years for me to be able to sleep without a pillow over my head. And – and it was – it was an absolute trauma. I mean, I – I – even today, if I hear some unexpected large noise, loud noise, I would jump. We did not know it at the time, that besides the air raid, we had an even deadlier situation developing in Budapest. What had happened is 3,000 gendarmes came out – came up to Budapest two days before, in process, or in – in the process of wanting us to be deported. In other words, by this – by the first of July, most of the Hungarian Jews from the countryside were deported. The only community alive was Budapest. My 150 relatives were largely dead by then. We did not know this, but what had happened is the extreme Nazis wanted to commit a coup, and get rid of Horthy. And they got these 3,000 gendarmes for two reasons; one is to prepare for deportation of the Jews, and number two is to get rid of Horthy. And there was only just a few, the courage of a few army officers who were available and who were ready to follow orders. And one single army unit, a Panzer division was willing to come to Budapest to counteract this – not necessarily the deportation of the Jews, but the – the coup against the region. And by the second of July, they were around Budapest, taking up positions. By the seventh of July, they forced these gendarmes to leave. And Horthy declared that that day, that they deportations would stop. And that, of course, saved our lives, because with 3,000 gendarmes, we would be deported in probably a week, or two weeks. I mean, in six weeks, almost 500,000 Hungarian Jews were deported from the countryside. You can imagine that 160 to 180,000 Jews in – in Budapest, were concentrated, could be deported in a matter of days. But we were not. And that saved our lives. What happened after this was a – a little miracle. Eichmann left. He was frustrated by this inaction by the Hungarian government. And he also knew that things were not going well in the front. What we didn’t know, but he did, and many of the Nazis did, is that the Hungarian government started again some negotiations with the western allies and even with the Russians. And these negotiations, essentially, they wanted to manifest this – their good will. So the way they did it is they essentially replaced the government with a – a government of army officers, who were not as extreme. And –
Q: Did you ever see Eichmann?
A: I did not personally see Eichmann, no.
Q: Did you ever see Horthy?
A: I have seen Horthy, yes, when I was a kid, yes.
Q: What did he appear to you to be like?
A: Well, he was a handsome old man. He was – he was an [indecipherable] but he was a – a horseman, and he – he rode the white horse. And we had a national holiday on the 20th of August, which was a holiday for the first king of Hungary, Saint Steven. And what I remember about – maybe I was six or seven when my father took me to this day – the – the Saint Steven’s day on the 20th of August was a great holiday, because his right hand was, as a miracle, was preserved. Now, this man died a thousand years ago, and his right hand was the icon of Hungary, and they took this right hand and – and they took it all around the city, you know, there’s a whole procession. And Horthy used to ride the horse, also. And I remember this procession in the late 30s, when this had happened. And I saw him once after that. In 1938, if I remember, there was a huge, Catholic congress in Budapest, where the pope came, and – or at least the man who became pope later, Pius the 12th. And he spoke and Horthy was with him and I saw – I remember that I saw – this was a huge thing. He was not just a Catholic thing, he was everybody’s thing, and I saw Horthy that time again, the second time.
Q: Was he a hero to you?
A: He was not a hero to me, but he was not a villain, either. We knew that he had Jewish friends. We knew that his best poker partner was a Jewish industrialist my – by name of Goldberger(ph) and Weiss(ph). And his wife was connected to – there was a rumor that his wife had Jewish blood in her. And that – we knew that his older son, married to a – a countess who was very much pro-Jew. In fact, it turned out that – that she was working for the – the – the anti-Nazi resistance. And she’s still alive. She’s a very old lady now. And we knew that – that Horthy, if he was not pro-Jewish, he had friends, and he was not the worst. He was not a hero, but he – as I said, he was not a villain either. So going back to my story, we did not know, but we were saved. After Horthy changed the government, things started to be a little easier. Up until then, we only had like one or two hours where we could go out to the street. We were – we had a – given a couple of more hours of freedom, free time to go to the street, to shop, for example.
Q: What did you do inside the apartment when you couldn’t go out?
