United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Sulamif Shreyber Zhabinskaya
August 17, 1999
RG-50.030*0399 PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a taped interview with Sulamif Shreyber Zhabinskaya, conducted on August 17, 1999 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
SULAMIF SHREYBER ZHABINSKAYA
August 17, 1999
Beginning Tape One
Question: Let’s just begin if you say your name at birth.
Answer: My first name?
Q: Both names.
A: Yeah, my first name is like in the Polish papers, I’m Sulamita. My last name, my maiden last name is Shreyber. Then in the Russian papers, I was Sulamif. And now, I want to be my real Hebrew name, is Shulanis [indecipherable] depends if you are saying it in [indecipherable] Ashkenazi Ishlanis.
Q: And your married name?
A: My married name is like a Polish name, Zhabinskaya. It’s a long name and very difficult for -- for English people to understand -- to -- to pronounce, I mean.
Q: And you also have a nickname.
A: I have a nickname, Luda.
Q: Okay. Can you tell us where and when you were born?
A: I was born -- I was born in Wilna. Wilna was Poland when I was born, belonged to Poland, on the 23rd of January, 1928.
Q: And where did you live in Wilna?
A: I lived on the street called Polnarska, Polnarska 33. And we had a -- a house, and I lived there with my parents and my brother, and a German lady who was like a help to my mother.
Q: And what was --
A: She was not a maid, but she was like a part of the family, but she was helping my mother, too, to cook, to clean the house.
Q: Can you tell us something about your family, your mother and your father?
