United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with John Meyerstein
July 1, 2004
RG-50.030*0487 PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a taped interview with John Meyerstein, conducted by Nina Ellis on July 1, 2004 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
ZDENKO JOHN BERGL
September 14, 2005 Beginning Tape One, Side A
Question: This is a United States Holocaust Memorial Museum interview with John Meyerstein.
Answer: Stein.
Q: John Meyerstein, conducted by Nina Ellis on July first, 2004, in Washington, D.C. This is tape number one, side A. Just for the record, would you tell me your name, where you live now, and when and where you were born.
A: Okay. My name is John Meyerstein. I was originally called Hans Meyerstein, but when we arrived in England after the St. Louis voyage, it was suggested to my parents that -- that they give me an English first name, and the name John was chosen, I’m not sure how, and it’s -- from that moment onwards it became that, and my parents never used any other name but that, at the time. I currently live in Oakville, Ontario, which is about 20 miles west of Toronto. I was born in Halle, Germany, on the 21st of March, 1935.
Q: Mm-hm. Tell me, do you have many memories of those first years in Germany?
A: Truthfully I have to say no. I know that some people say that they can remember everything when they were in a pram, or a cradle. I have to be truthful and say I do not recall those sort of things.
Q: Okay. Tell me about your parents, their names, and where they were from.
A: My father was Ludwig Meyerstein. He was born in Rosslau, Germany in -- on March the 10th, 1893. My mother was Alice Meyerstein, born Alice Eisner, and she was born in a -- a place called Gutentag, in Upper Silesia, Germany, on the 29th of June, 1910.
Q: And do you know wh-where they met, and how -- how they came to be married?
A: How they met I don’t know, I rather suspect it was one of these arranged marriages. Both my families -- both my parent’s families were financially very well off, and I can only conclude that it was assumed that this would be a good way of having a marriage. My mother never discussed it, in fact she probably talked to my wife years later on things which she didn’t discuss with me. But how they actually met, and -- I don’t know, I rather think it was a -- an arranged marriage, but how that was done, if -- if my assessment is correct, I have no idea.
