Key: GK — Genia Klapholz, interviewee LF — Lucille Fisher, interviewer [Interview conducted on July 29, 1981.] Tape one, side one:
LF: Mrs. Klapholz, tell us a little bit about where you were born, and when, and a little bit about your family.
GK: I was born in Poland in a small town near Krakow.
LF: And what was the name of the town?
GK: It was called Wisznicz.
LF: Spell it, would you?
GK: Wisznicz, W-I-S-Z-N-I-C-Z. [Wisnicz] This is very close to Krakow. My family, we were four sisters and one brother. We weren’t very rich, because in this time in Europe it wasn’t so good like it is now in the United States, but we were a very happy family. My two sisters were married; my brother was married, my brother had two children. One of my sisters had three children, and the other of my sisters had one child and she was pregnant with the second, and she was deported. I had one younger sister. She was very dear to me; we were very devoted to each other. In September 1, 1939, when the war broke out between Poland and Germany, it was on a Friday morning, my mother got up very early, like 6:00, and she saw that the Polish Army are walking out. So she came in the house and she called my father. My father’s name was Leibish. “Leibish, Leibish, eppes via Rikhtsug!” [something...like a withdrawal] And my father said, “Akh, di vayber, zehen si shvart’s aus.” [Oh, the women with their gloomy outlook.] And my mother said, “Look, look, the soldiers are going back!” In the morning about 7:00 we saw the first patrol and the Germans came in.
LF: You weren’t expecting them or...
GK: We didn’t even know it was war. We didn’t have radios, we didn’t have television. We had only the papers, and the papers was written there was going to be a war. But before we got the papers that there’s going to be a war, the Germans were already in Poland. They surrounded...we weren’t so close to the German border, but they surrounded around wherever was easier to coming in. Anyhow, Poland was sold to the Germans. So right away, this was on a Friday morning, the same Friday the German when they came in, they made the Sperrstunden [curfew].
LF: Like a time limit. I can’t think of the word, but I know exactly what you mean.
GK: You couldn’t go out after...
LF: Curfew.
GK: Curfew, yeah. See, this slipped my mind. It was right away curfew. To 2:00 we were allowed to go out. From 2:00 every Jew suppose to stay in the house. 6:00 we hear a voice that we can go out for two hours, from 6:00 to 8:00, so the men can gather in the synagogue. Like usual Friday night they went to services. And by 8:00 the military surrounded the synagogue, and they said that tomorrow all the beards has to be cut. So it was, of course crying, lamenting...Saturday for Jews in small town, such a religious town, so to cut the beard... But somehow, they postponed, I don’t know who interviewed but it was postponed. The young mens were taken to clean. And our town was one of the biggest...
LF: Industries, one of the biggest...
GK: What they have now in Camden?
LF: Housing projects in Camden?
GK: Umm...
LF: We can think about it. I know, a prison.
GK: A prison. Isn’t that something that my mind gets blank! It was one of the biggest prisons in Poland. So the military ordered in there in this prison, and the Jewish boys were taken to clean the toilets. I’m ashamed to say that they had to clean the toilets with bare hands. No brushes were used, and it wasn’t toilets like it is here to flush with water, but it was different. And then every day they caught boys and girls to work in the prison, for the soldiers. They killed chickens, the girls did clean the chickens, and packed, and they sent to Germany, to the families, or I don’t know what they did with them. Then came, after a few weeks didn’t take long, we have to give up all the furs. It wasn’t a rich town like I said, but everyone had the fur coat; it was the style. Women had diamond engagement rings, had a golden chain in a watch on the neck and so, first we had to give up the furs. Then, a week later, we had to give up all the silver what we had. Of course, some Jewish people did hide in bunkers. For example, by us in the house, my father made a bunker, and he did hide candlesticks, flatware, kiddush cups. Every poor family had some silver from wedding gifts, because it wasn’t this hard to give money to the wedding; whoever came to the wedding they gave a gift, a kiddush cup, a thing.
So he made a bunker to hide this because we thought maybe the war was going to be over. As a matter of fact, my father was hiding there with three other people in this bunker until he was killed. Then, when was to give up all the silver, and the gold, and the diamonds, and every possession, whatever somebody had, you have to give it away. A year...this took place, almost a year, a year, because this was like the ghetto place from Krakow, when was made the ghetto in Plaszow, so a lot of Jewish people came to Wisnicz to hide, because Wisnicz was the whole town the ghetto, and all the Jews from around wherever it was judenrein. This mean free from Jews. So the ghetto in Wisnicz, we had yet what to eat and what to drink, because it was a big problem, food, during the war.
LF: Sure.
GK: And when he gathered all the Jews in Wisnicz, they made Wisnicz judenrein. Without anything, it was said that the next day in the morning everybody should come to the Appellplatz for roll call in the middle of the town. It was such a big place. But my father hide himself in the bunker. My mother went in the woods, nearby little village, and my two sisters went with the transport. They said that the young people they will take to work. As a matter of fact, my oldest sister had the children by a Christian family. She gave everything from her possession, whatever she had, that they should keep the children.
LF: How many children did she have?
GK: Three children. And when we were standing on the roll call, she came with the children. So, of course, the children were in a terrible way. You wouldn’t even believe that this could happen. A little baby, she was six months old, a soldier took her and hit her with two feet in head, and then with this little angel head, he knocked on a tree. This picture I always had before my eyes, because people wouldn’t believe that such an intelligent nation like the German, they could do such a terrible thing to innocent children. Then they went, me and my younger sister escaped from this place. I don’t know how. I don’t know where I got this ambition, but like somebody would pull me away, we two, the two of us, we went in the neighborhood village. We was hidden there for eight days. We were laying on the ebbek [perhaps, attic] from a house. It was, I knew her from before. So laying there straight, and at night, she used to bring us a little bit food and drink. Of course, I paid her very, very well for it. And when it came after a week, she said she can’t hold us any more, we have to go back to the ghetto. In the meantime, Wisnicz was judenrein, and everybody moved to Bochnia. This is a neighborhood city. And in Bochnia was a ghetto, too. So we moved all in this ghetto and we start a new life. A new life...
LF: Do you want to stop a few minutes...?
GK: Before it was judenrein, when it was announced the next day all the Jews has to stay to the Appellplatz, this means to the roll call, we had a lot of Torahs and whatever, from all the synagogues. So all the Jews gathered the Torahs, and they buried on the Jewish cemetery, and it was looking just like a big funeral. All the Jews from the whole city gathered together and to cry how we buried the holy scrolls. The next day was the roll call and was judenrein. So the younger people was chosen to go to work, and to cut woods in [not clear]. This was a little wood, a forest, called [unclear], and there my brother-in-law was working, and the other brother-in-law was working there, but there sisters went to a transport, and we didn’t know where they went. They never came back, of course. Neither my mother came back to Bochnia to the ghetto, because the Polish people saw her and they told her, “If you don’t go right away from here, we will tell the German that a Jude is here.” How come that so many Jews went because of the Polish people. They didn’t help. The little boys, they learned one word, “Jude, Jude,” because the German didn’t recognize. The Jewish people in Europe looked very much alike the German women, and they did not recognize which woman is Jewish and which not. But the little, the boys and girls, point with the finger, “Jude, Jude.” When they said, “Jude,” so they had their share. So they told my mother, “If you don’t go right away, if you don’t leave this place, we will call the police, and we will tell that you are here. So my mother came to Bochnia, to the ghetto. I did not recognize her.
LF: How long hadn’t you seen her?
GK: A short time, but the way she looked...
LF: Just a short time.
GK: Maybe two months she was hidden in the forest. She looked so skinny. She lost probably half of her weight. I don’t know because at home we didn’t weigh, we didn’t care about the figures but she was so skinny in her face, it got so changed, so black from not eating, not sleeping, not washing, and not changing. So, we were, my younger sister, my mother, and me were in Bochnia in ghetto. Through somebody who I knew from before, he tried that I should work in a factory where they make the soldiers the Army...
LF: Uniforms.
GK: Uniforms. This factory was called...
LF: Well, it doesn’t matter.
GK: I worked there, my younger sister, and my mother. We were in Bochnia, in ghetto, for a year. It was a terrible time, because one time they came around that we couldn’t cook, special when come Friday. We didn’t have gas stoves but coal stoves, so the chimney, through the chimney came the smoke...
LF: Smoke.
GK: So they saw that here in this house is somebody cooking. We weren’t allowed to cook. We weren’t allowed to go out. Once we weren’t allowed all different things. They wanted to mutche out [torment], you know, to drop dead without use a bullet. After a year, my mother again tried to hide in a bunker, but the bunker was recovered. So she, we was told everybody should came again in Bochnia, to the roll call. So the elderly people, they made one line, the middle aged, they made another line, and the young people another line.
LF: Yes.
GK: And I was lucky enough to be with my younger sister in one line. So we were chosen to go to Szebnie. Szebnie is called a Durchgangslager. [transit camp] Nobody all the thirty years talked about Szebnie. Szebnie was a small camp, and not too many Jewish people were there, but I will tell you what happened there. That is why the people should know what they did. My mother was chosen with all the elderly people, elderly, my mother was 52 years, she wasn’t elderly but...
LF: No.
GK: But by them it was elderly. So I wanted to go together with my mother, because we all knew we will had the execution; we waited for the execution because everybody had to go, one thing we knew. We didn’t have anything to fight with. So when I want to go to my mother, they were standing with a big dog, and a dog jumped at me, and he caught a piece of my leg. But it didn’t matter, and he pushed me back that I should go to my row, where I belong. From there this was...Next month is going to be the memorial, what we are keeping on Bochnia, on the Bochnia evacuation. We came to Szebnie. It was a roll call in the morning, and there was...the Lagerführer was Zhimik, his name was Zhimik. He probably was a Volksdeutsche [of German origin] because the name Zhimik is not a real German name. So, like usually, with the finger point, “Right, left, right, left,” and my little sister was chosen “Left.” We didn’t know, because this was the first time what we saw with the “Right, left,” because until Szebnie, we didn’t know what this means. A day...At this time, this people who was chosen “Left” was barracked in a different barrack, and we were in a different barrack. But at night I went to my sister and I hugged her and I said, “Oh, dear God, thank God that you are here.” So she said to me, “Listen, we are all here for counted days. We know what is waiting for us.” And the men start to pile a big pile of woods, and we didn’t know yet for what. Next morning, early in the morning, came an open Auto with...I don’t know a mistake or not, I think, 200 or 400 people, Jewish people...young, beautiful, from Tarnow. This was not far from Szebnie. Szebnie is a little town near Jasno. So these people who was chosen in Szebnie together with the other people from Tarnow was taken. And it was made a very big fire, and alive they was throwing in this fire. And nobody could hear even this crying, the pain, what they went through, because we were like paralyzed. I did write in Jewish a little about Szebnie. It was published in our bulletin from the New Americans.
LF: Do you have a copy of it?
GK: I have it, here.
LF: Would you give it to me?
GK: I have the book. It is in Jewish.
LF: Before I leave could I have a copy of it? Would you like to read it into this? Do you want to read it?
GK: [Yiddish spoken here].
In Undenk mine Shvester Sara in Szebnie Lager Oh-szhebnie, ich Ken dich nisht fargessen.
Dos host mine shvester groiszam oifgefressen.
Ich tsind dos Licht fahr dine nishomeh.
Oh Gott in himmel, vee iz dee nehkumeh.
Shtil in Lager, ah moireh fahlt Plitsling hert zich ah gellald Alles Arois, Shnel oif der frai Zay Shtayen nebech tzoom Lesten mohl in der Rai Tzvaigen Tachreecheem zay dee bletter Fahr dee mames, fahr dee shvester Meh haste undz tsu zingen troier Lider Fahr dem toit fun undzer breeder Dos nemen bahld zich dos holtz Trogen Ruik shtill tuen mir Vidiv zogen Tzvai hundert fuftzik yungeh Lebens Tsuzamen Varft men lebedik in dee flahmen Es brent dos fie-er Yiddish leben iz nisht tie-er Kine Kerper iz nisht gebliben tzu bagroben Vile der vint hot dos ash tzetrogen Oh Zshebnie, ich Ken dich nisht fargessen Dos host mine shvester groiszam oifgegessen Ich tzindt dos Licht fahr dine nishomeh O Gott in himmel, vee iz dee nehkumeh.
By Genia Klapholz In Memory of My Sister, Serl, of Szebnie Camp
by Genia Kalpholz O Szebnie, I cannot forget you.
You have cruelly devoured my sister.
I light a candle in memory of your soul, O God in heaven, where is revenge?
It is quiet in the camp,
A terror descends.
Suddenly there is heard a scream.
“All out! Quickly, outside!” Alas, they stand in a line for the last time.
The leaves weave for them shrouds, For the mothers, for the sisters.
They order us to sing songs of mourning.
On the death of our brothers.
Where can we find quickly the wood to carry, Silently, and quietly, we look for shovels.
250 young lives together, are thrown alive into the flames,
The fire burns, As Jewish life is not precious.
No body remains to be buried For the wind has carried afar the ashes.
O Szebnie, I cannot forget you.
You have cruelly devoured my sister.
I light a candle in memory of your soul, O God in heaven, where is revenge?
In Memory of My Sister, Serl, of Szebnie Camp (in Yiddish)
by Genia Kalpholz
LF: When did you write this?
GK: 1974.
LF: In 1974. I think it’s important that you recited that into this, and, if you will, I’d love to have a copy so we could put it along with what we need to put it along with.
GK: So in Szebnie, we were only for three months. After three months...
LF: Did you work there?
GK: Yes, I worked in a sewing factory. But I didn’t do any sewing. I was a cleaning woman in the office. I clean, whatever somebody could find any work. We did not mind.
LF: Did most of the community work that way?
GK: This was no community; it was just a camp.
LF: Just a camp.
GK: There was no civil people. And most of the people were working in the uniform-sewing factory, and some was in the cleaning department.
LF: How many people would you say were in that camp?
GK: In the camp was about between 2,000 and 2,500. And from there after three months, we stood again at the roll call...always with these roll calls...and Zhimik, he said, “Ich bin euer Vater. Ich geh mit wie ihr geht, geh ich mit euch.” [I am your father. I go with you. As you go, I go with you.] This was true. He went with us but we went to Auschwitz, and he went also to Auschwitz, but whatever he did and whatever [they] did with us was two different stories.
LF: Two different jobs. If we stop right here, I’m going to turn this tap over because I think we’re coming to the end of it.
Tape one, side two:
LF: All right, I think you’re ready to talk a little bit more. You ended where?
GK: From Szebnie we went to Auschwitz.
LF: Let’s go back a little bit. When you were in your town, was there a Jewish Council, a Judenrat, in the town?
GK: Not in our town.
LF: Not in your town.
GK: In Bochnia was a Judenrat.
LF: So there was none in your town?
GK: No, in our town there was, until was judenrein, was more or less free, in the Polish magistrate...took care.
LF: Was there any communication between the outside world by the newspapers?
GK: None whatsoever.
LF: None whatsoever.
GK: No, no, we had a newspaper, Nowy Dziennik [New Daily] it was called, but we did not receive as soon as the Germans came in. We were completely shut out of the outside world. The only thing what we knew, when the people came in from different cities where it was more dangerous than by us, so they came in, so they told, “The Germans is doing this, the Germans is doing that.” One told a story, the Germans came in his house and he had a beautiful daughter. They told her she should undress completely and stand on the table, and they made with her all different exercises, and he said it was terrible for him to see. So, all different stories what...we heard.
LF: What you were told.
GK: Yeah, what we were just told.
LF: Well, tell me, was there any underground in the ghetto that you knew about?
GK: Not in our town. It was underground, but not in our town.
LF: Not in your town. And...
GK: It was a little farther than other states, in other...
LF: Did the Poles help the Nazis to prosecute the Jews?
GK: Yes, that’s what I told. They learned to say “Jude.” This was their thing, “Jude.” My mother would survive, my father would survive, because my mother spoke a very beautiful Polish, and they really would not recognize that she is Jewish, only that she was wearing a wig. All the Jewish women that was religious they was wearing a sheitel [wig]. Of the Poles...my mother went and my father was discovered from the bunker. My father was, I forgot to tell you, my father and six other Jews were in the bunker, and they took them out, and they were shot in middle of...before the city hall. They were lined up, they were all shot, and two children. The Poles then told me, and they were all buried in one hole. Not even a grave, in one hole. They were put in tar. You know what this is? This is the black on the roofs.
LF: Yes, tar.
GK: Yeah, they put in this hole, tar, and they make a fire, and they were dancing and laughing, “This is what happens to Jews who want to do bad things to the Germans.” The Jews going to fight against the Germans with their bare hands...
LF: And then, then it was Auschwitz.
GK: Now we are...I forgot where I am. Now I am in Auschwitz.
LF: Now tell about how you got to Auschwitz.
GK: When we, from Szebnie, Zhimik went with us...
LF: The leader, yes.
GK: The leader, and coming there was the same, “Left, right, left, right.” We didn’t know we were in wagons, that even cows have better wagons, because at least they have a window. We were completely dark, a little bit straw on the floor, and nothing to wear, just the one dress that you had...
LF: What year was this?
GK: This was in 1942.
LF: 1942.
GK: Yes, then was judenfrei Szebnie. They cleaned up, they cleaned up already Wisnicz where I was, they cleaned out [unclear] because before I was in [unclear] and then they cleaned up Bochnia, and now they cleaned up Szbenie. So from Szebnie we went in the wagons. A lot of people fainted, some died, and we didn’t have no water to drink, and from eating, forget about it. And no sleeping, only one on each other; we had to go in the bathroom, we just made. Excuse me for my expression, but this was the truth. You wouldn’t believe it. Sometimes I ask myself, how could I go through all this, and still be a human being and still want to live, and to have everything what my eyes can see that I can afford. I mean I don’t want things, but how can I.. . it’s impossible to believe. We were sitting, and we were making, one and two, like where we were sitting, and we didn’t have no paper, no nothing. Worse than cows or horses.
LF: This was...you were with your mother...?
GK: No. Nobody.
LF: No, your mother had already...
GK: Nobody, my mother was taken already in Bochnia.
LF: And you didn’t see her any more.
GK: If somebody was taken, it was good-bye. You never saw again, and my sister was taken in Szebnie. So I was by myself, survival, which I expect that my end is going to be in Auschwitz. But somehow when he turned left and right, I was in a row to go to the camp, and the others went straight to the crematorium. My cousin was there, my friends...and they went right to the crematorium. Coming to Birkenau...this is Auschwitz, but near...so we went to the sauna. The sauna is the shower. First, there, they cut completely the hair, like I had beautiful long, curly red hair, and my curls fell on the floor and I start to cry, and the girl who cut my hair, she said, “What you crying? The hair is nothing. You see, everything goes to the oven.” I don’t...cry. Then we went to the sauna, take a shower. They gave us five minutes cold water and during the five minutes you couldn’t even wash up. Then they put us on the uniform, long dresses in stripes, gray and blue, and on the head a handkerchief, a kerchief, and they gave us one pot, one pint pot. This is for our dishes and our furniture and...out in the row, to stay in line. I stood in line and I asked what is next to me, I said, “Who are you? Who are all these old women?” So she said, “Genia, don’t you recognize me? I am Velsa.” My girlfriend, what we were together in home. We went to school together and we were in the camp together. We were in the ghetto together, we were in Auschwitz together...But...
LF: She had changed.
GK: Taken off the hair and put on this uniform we didn’t look like women, we looked like witches. Worse than a witch, even. Not like human beings. Then we went in the camp. We had six weeks quarantine. Quarantined, that means not to go to work, not to go to the oven to wait. What did we wait? I don’t know. Till Mashiach [Messiah] will come and he will liberate us? Nobody will listen to us, nobody looked for us, nobody wanted to liberate us. And the six weeks was terrible. Everyone of us, we were all young girls, had Durchfall [diarrhea]. I’m getting very nervous here; we all had diarrhea. And to have diarrhea in Auschwitz was completely like a dead person, because it was no toilet, excuse me for expression, no anything to clean up, excuse me, for I express myself, and a toilet was outside, a room, maybe twenty holes, and we went in and we did and that’s all. Nothing else. We didn’t have any water to wash up. So we were sleeping four in a Koye [wooden bunk]. The Koye was as big as this table, so the four was laying on one side, one next to each other. If somebody want to turn, all four had to turn because it wasn’t place that one should lay on the bed or on the belly. Everyone had to lay only on the right side or on the left side, and on the Koye it wasn’t so beautiful too, because nothing to clean up, so we made up between each other, every morning we would take the tea, what we getting, and one portion of tea we would divide between the four of us, and three portions of tea we would wash our shirt, our...
LF: Clothing.
GK: Not the clothing, our undershirt. Nothing else. Pants we didn’t wear, underpants, just the undershirt. And so this went on for six weeks. After six weeks, I was chosen to go to a factory to work. This was ammunition factory. We did make Einsatzstücke zu Zündbomben [probably, inserts for incendiary bombs] for a German firm. During the time, when I was working, I was working next to a Pulverraum [powder storage room] where...so the girls smuggled out Pulver, how you say in English, this powder, this powder to the mens...and the mens did...
LF: Was it gun powder?
GK: Gun powder, yeah.
LF: And they smuggled it to the men’s...
GK: They smuggled it to the men’s...
LF: Side.
GK: Also the...workers there.
LF: Workers.
GK: Workers there, and they were in...[pause] girls smuggled out the gun powder to the mens, and the mens tried to blow out one crematorium. Unfortunately, it wasn’t 100 per cent done like they was planning to do, but they were caught, and the four girls were hanged in Auschwitz. This was very short before we were liberated.
LF: How long were you in Auschwitz?
GK: Almost two years, not quite. Not quite. During...when I was in Auschwitz, three times I was chosen to go to the crematorium, but somehow a good angel always pushed me away and I escape. I want to tell you one incident, it’s a shame to even talk what they did, not to listen, but even to talk...
LF: It’s important that you talk.
GK: In January, it was in the month of January, I think it was 1943 or 1944, I don’t recall exactly, anyhow, they wanted make Entlausung [delousing], general cleaning. So everything we had to take off, naked like we were born, and we went out, outside, and in Poland January outside is not like here. There is snow at least four or five inches high, and completely naked without shoes, without stockings, the whole Block was then standing. Who was inside, so they warmed up, one to each other, the back to the front. And who was outside, around, so you made a round to stay close to each other, that we should warm up. And these soldiers were standing a little bit farther, and laughing, and they were shooting from the thing, not to us, they were shooting, just so, to make, scare us, that they going to shoot us. And, I don’t know how they could do this. Now you would ask somebody to go out, you don’t know what mean winter, because here is no winter compared to the winter in Europe. And to go out naked and to stay for an hour...that we weren’t frozen stiff, frozen, with this food, the nourishment what we had, only what we had, maybe, the foundation what we had at home. I don’t know, it’s a miracle. It’s just a miracle. Like all other miracles that they said with the Jewish people. Once, I had swollen feet because of the [unclear], probably, and my feet got swollen. And so I came to work, so the Kapo told me that I limp a little bit. She said, “What you limping.” So I showed her I had here something, so she said, “O.K., come into the doctor.” I went into the doctor because this Kommando protect the company, protect where we worked, protect the Häftlingers [prisoners]. So he protect us. So in there, there was a doctor. So we can imagine he made the operation, from here to here, without freezing, without any anesthesia, without nothing, just to cut in the [unclear]. Going home I limped because my feet hurt more than before yet, so, of course, that’s when they told me “Left.” I have to go in another barracks, so tomorrow is going to be a transport to another crematorium, so I go with them. So the whole night I didn’t sleep, I didn’t cry that I should survive. I prayed to God that I shouldn’t suffer too long, that the death should come in one second, that I shouldn’t suffer this thing because some...we were in the Block where the chimneys were burning and the fire we see, day and night we did see the fire. And the smell of the bones and on the flesh, it was just terrible. But, somehow, in the morning I didn’t ask nobody nothing and I got up, and I went in the line, and I went to work. And so nobody remembered me, even. There is so many things what I went through in this Auschwitz that is unbelievable. When...
LF: Do you still dream, do you still dream?
GK: Now, since my husband died, it’s a year ago, I start to dream and the camp...I dream every night about my husband, but till then I dreamed every single night, and especially now in this time, this time of the year, every year was a different episode. So we went through different tortures.
LF: You relived it.
GK: Yes, so this time of the year is the worst time of the year. When in 1945 in January, we closed the camp, Auschwitz.
LF: You say, “We closed.” What do you mean?
GK: All the Häftlinger, all the Jews who was still alive, because the Russian came in. In 1945, they were already in Krakow, and this came to our knowledge. I mean the girls around. We were very close with each other. As a matter of fact, when we were sitting at work, so what we was talking? About food, nothing but food. Oh, when we will be liberated! So the only wish was mine...Everyone said that we have a small table in a small room and a whole bread on the table and a piece of butter and a coffee. And when we going to make a party, so we will cook, potatoes with meatballs and borscht. This was a Polish dish. And our wish was only to have a whole bread. In Auschwitz I took sick. I had typhus. I had high fever, I didn’t know how high, but I didn’t know what’s going on with me, so I couldn’t eat for two days. So...
LF: Were you hospitalized, did you have medical care?
GK: What else? What you think, I was in paradise? I was in Auschwitz!
LF: There was no doctor?
GK: No, God forbid, I would go to the hospital, they would put me in the crematorium. So I was laying on this bed, so-called, and didn’t eat for two days nothing, so the girls who were sleeping with me, they took my bread and my soup and whatever we had there, and one of the girls said, “I will give you something.” So she give me half of her carrot. Not washed, not scrubbed, with all the dirt. I ate it, and this brought me to life. To this day, whenever I am sick, I’m taking a carrot, but, of course, all different style, to eat it. When I was sick, I couldn’t go to work, so the oldest from the Block, she said, “If you don’t go to work, you know you’re going to be sent, you know where.” So I said, “O.K., I will go tomorrow to work.” I couldn’t go to work, but I went. We were sitting there.
I go now back to the end of Auschwitz when, when these girls were hanged, so we were in the first line. We, this means the girls, because we were working in the next room from the gun powder. So the oldest said, “You see the girls now are hanging because they wanted to blow the crematorium. Next, you are coming.” They mean, us, that we are coming. So all of us, the girls, we were twenty girls around this table what we was working, so said, “Oh, now it is our time, thank God that we wait so long, that tomorrow is going to be our day.” But, in the meantime, the Russian was rushing too much, and they came in January to Krakow...so they moved the camp from Auschwitz to deep Germany. I don’t know what for they needed us, what for they made so much fuss with us. But, anyhow...and this. And this was called death march of Auschwitz, because it was in the winter time, January 18, 1945. I have written...you want me to read this...
LF: Yes, I do, and I would like to change the tape on this so that we will be sure to get the whole thing on.
Perhaps “intervened” is meant.
Association of Jewish New Americans.
GENIA KLAPHOLZ [1-1- PAGE 1] From the collection of the Gratz College Holocaust Oral History Archive GENIA KLAPHOLZ [1-2- PAGE 15] From the collection of the Gratz College Holocaust Oral History Archive
Tape two, side one:
LF: This is an interview with Mrs. Genia Klapholz, K-L-A-P-H-O-L-Z. You were saying that you find it so hard to believe...and you were talking about...
GK: I am a believer. I believe in God, I believe in miracles, because I am born and raised in a very religious home. My father and my mother was righteous people, I could say. They were learned in Jewish and they gave this to their children. Every Friday night in the winter time, especially, when the nights was long. We didn’t have any television, God forbid, if we had, we wouldn’t watch it on Shabbas. And after my father came from the synagogue, he would sing “Sholem Alechem,” “Ayshes Hayil,” all the Jewish songs, and then was the Kiddush and the meal, and after the meal, he used to sit and always tell stories from the Rabbi, from this Rabbi, from that Rabbi, from all the Rabbis, the stories. And Saturday night was the same thing, after Havdalah. So we used to make a meal, this was called in Jewish the melaveh malka. This means a meal for the queen, to end, because the entering of Shabbas is like the queen entering the house... And we have to...welcome. So my father told me once a story, not to me, to the family. How do I translate this in English? That the light of King David will never go out, that will go on forever. God will punish the Jewish people, but, he will never destroy the nation. Even once, he told a story that in a little town, it was a very stormy day and everything went, the houses and the trees, and nothing was left over after this storm. But they saw one little tree was, and from this little tree grew the whole forest and again they rebuilt this city. I had to make very short. But this is all this in my mind, even it is so many years, because I practice this in my life. I remember when Daddy said that God will never...
LF: Forget, abandon?
GK: Anyhow, my whole family went. I was the only survivor. Why did I survive? Why didn’t I go? My sister was better than I. She was more religious than I was. My mother, for sure was a better woman, a woman of the valley [GK must mean “woman of valor”], like they say, “ayshes hayil.” My sisters were all very religious and very fine people. Why did I survive? So then, it reminds me the story of my father, I survive that from me should be another generation. I thought I will never be married. I will go to Israel, and I will work on the kibbutz, and this is going to be my life. But, then, I said, “No, my father said different. My father said when one branch remains, from this branch has to be a tree, and from the tree has to be another tree, and another tree and it will come a forest.” So I got married.
LF: So let’s get back to the death march from Auschwitz. You say you wrote this little poem?
GK: Yes, I wrote this.
LF: You want to give me a copy of these poems, and you’re going to read it into here. Go ahead.
GK: [She speaks Yiddish here.]
Todesmärsche fun Auschwitz Mir mashirn Fun Komander in Lager Ahrine Men zate shoin nit Kine Vach oif Di Posten Shtine Es Tut zich in lager a groiser gerider Mel hot shoin aroisgefihrt undzere shveoter un breeder Dee tihren fun alle Kameren oifgemacht brayt A bafehl fun dee merder, mir zohlen tzum marsh zine grate In droisen ah frost, dee ehrd mit diken shnay badekt Oif undz heftlecher tsitert dee hoit un fahlt a shrek.
Vee gate men undz ois des veg dee fihren Ful velcheh crematorium gate men far undz oif-efenen dee tihren Dee bafelder un farshnay-teh veg gayen mir fun Auschvitz Koim miten Leben Es Klingt vee muzik in dee oih-eren Vee dee Koilen zenen fun dee biksen Geh-floigen S’fahlt a breeder, s’fahlt a Kind A Lezt geshray es trogt der vint Ver Veht zay tsum Kaver trogen?
Ver veht noch zay Kaddish zogen?
Gottenyu, nor du ahlane zest dee yiddishe pine Mach oif dee oigen un Kuk ahrop oif dine getselt Un zay vee dee Ditchen hoben dineh Kinder umgeh-bracht Ich bate dich, Gottenyu, zolst nisht far-shvi-gen Fun dee merder ni Komeh nemen,
nish ois-miden.
By Genia Klapholz The Death March from Auschwitz
by Genia Klapholz We march from the command into the camp We see no guards on the stone posts.
Within the camp there is a great tumult, They have already taken out our sisters and brothers.
The gates of all the chambers are opened wide, An order by the murderers, we are to be ready for the march.
Outside there is a frost, the earth is covered with thick snow.
Our skin trembles, a fear falls upon us.
Where will we, the chosen ones, be led?
To which crematorium will they open the doors for us?
Over field and snow covered ways, we go from Auschwitz by the last breath of life.
It sounds like music in the ears.
As bullets fly from the guns.
Falls a brother, falls a child, A last cry is carried by the wind.
Who will carry them to a Jewish grave?
Who will say kaddish for them?
Dear God, only You alone See the Jewish suffering.
Open Your eyes and look down upon Your tents And see how the Germans have murdered Your children.
I beg You, God, You shall not silent be To take revenge of murderers, do not avoid it.
The Death March from Auschwitz (in Yiddish)
By Genia Klapholz
GK: On the march, so this, wasn’t, already, the soldier by themself, they killed whoever, they just look at somebody and if he didn’t see something, maybe he smiled, maybe he didn’t look the look he wanted him to look, kill him, kill him. And the snow was red from blood. We were the last Kommando, the last from the Auschwitz, so that’s why we did see the what had happened before. So we saw, the first thing when we came, and we saw the snow is red, so I asked my next one I said, “What has happened here? Do they take us here to kill us here on the snow? Under the bare sky? And people is going to see what they’re doing. Will they do this?” So she said, “I don’t know. It seems to be like, so take a look. He’s a dead one, here’s a dead one, here is the snow red.” And so we walked, we walked from Thursday night until Saturday night. Saturday night, we came to point called Raciborz. And there came the train, and suppose to pick us up and take us to deep Germany. And I was fed up already with everything. I said, “I am not going anymore. Let them kill me here, I stay here.” And I escaped from this march.
LF: How did you do that?
GK: How I did? It wasn’t so simple.
LF: By yourself?
GK: No, me and two other girls was waiting to hide some place behind this barn. It was a barn, there where we were waiting for the train. And waiting behind this barn, and looking all over where we can hide. It was Saturday night, because it was winter, so the day was short. 4:00 or 5:00, it was night already. So I said to her, “Listen, the barn is full, and we don’t have place where to go in.” So we went to this Aufseher, and we said, “Maybe we will go some place to sleep?” And so he said, “Yes, I’m going with you.” So ten girls went, this was on top of the hill, went down the hill, down the hill was a village, a Polish village, and we slept there. It was beautiful. She gave us a bed with white blanket covers.
LF: Who was she?
GK: Polish.
LF: Polish.
GK: But she didn’t know who we are in the beginning. Then she knew we are from, escapers from the transport. And this was a bakery, so they brought beautiful rolls in the middle of the night, by 1:00 or 2:00, and we ate, and in the morning we begged her, “Keep us, keep us for two days.” She didn’t want to keep us. She said, “No you have to go back to the transport, and if you’re not going back, right here is the police, I will go on the police and I will tell them you are escape from the transport.” So we didn’t have any other choice. We went from there and then...
LF: Did you feel she wanted to help you, but was afraid?
GK: No, she didn’t want it. She could help us. She could because this was the border from Germany and Poland, not the border, the real border, but where were fighting. The Russians were on this side in Rydmy and this was the other side, Raciborz. The other side was Raciborz, and Raciborz was in the middle, so she could tell we are from Rydmy. She didn’t want to help us. So, the rest of the girls went some place, I don’t know. And I said, “I am not going no place. They will kill me here, or I will stay here.” So me, and two other girls went into...it start to get daylight. I said, “Listen, it is Sunday morning and they are going to the church. Maybe we will go to the church.” But I didn’t have any clothes. I had the red stripe in the back, so they knew that I am from camp, and with the number on my hand and so, surely, where could I go there? Then we decide, we talk to each other, and said, “There is no time to talk and to decide. Let’s go in the first house.” We knocked on the door, and she let us in. I said, “Please, let us in your barn.” So she opened the barn. We went in and we went deep in the hay, and was laying there the whole day not talk a word, not do anything but quiet, in the hay. At night, she called us in the kitchen, and she asked us, “What nationality are you?” So I was afraid that the other girls would start so I said, “Jewish.” So she said, “Also people.” I heard, “Also people,” so she gave us water to wash up. This was the first thing what we needed, and she gave us something to eat, and we went back into the barn. So it went on for a week. Every night we came in the house to eat and the whole day we was in the barn. Later, they made the office in her house because the Germans moved, moved, every time a little bit farther, farther. It was full Germans around, and I was there for three months. And the three months was just as bad as the time in any other camp. I wouldn’t compare with Auschwitz, but with any other camp, like Szebnie, Bochnia and Wisnicz, and...and all other cities with the ghettos. Because I was afraid that they will recognize that I am from Auschwitz and I am Jewish. First of all, I was wearing a long sleeve shirt. She gave me a shirt with long sleeves, and I had there plenty, plenty during this time to be there. So, when we were hidden in the hay for a week, and after a week they make the office, and they need the barn for the horses. So it was for us a terrible thing. What we shall do now? We are in this, this woman took us in, and she said she was going to, she was very, very nice somehow...
LF: A Polish woman?
GK: Yeah, a Polish woman. She didn’t know us. I didn’t have any money. I didn’t have nothing to give her, and I didn’t have nothing to promise her. But somehow she was good. Maybe it was from God-sent that I should survive, and this way I should be liberated. She divide us, to one brother and to one sister, because we were three girls. So one girl went to her brother, and another girl she gave to her sister, and I remained in her house. Somehow she start to like me. She said, “You going to stay in my house.” I asked her if she had something to fix, because in Poland they used to make patches on everything, on pants, on dresses, on blouses, on linens. “Oh,” she said, “you know how to sew.” I said, “Yes, I’m a wonderful seamstress. Give me something to fix.” So she brought in a full basket, and this was for me like the best medicine, because I went in a separate room, and I had the sewing machine, and a full basket of things to fix, and then she brought me new material to make something, which I didn’t know how, but I made it. It was good. And when the soldiers came in that I should shorten...
LF: Trousers.
GK: Coats, the coats. So I said, “I’m sorry, this machine doesn’t sew heavy things,” and I didn’t do nothing for them because I was afraid that maybe my Polish is not like their Polish. Because this was from Schlesien [Silesia] from on the border, and I spoke a different Polish, but very good Polish, with Polish accent, but it was different than theirs, so where do I come to be there? Conversation, conversation, I didn’t want to start nothing. One day came in her husband, and he said, “Listen, I can’t keep you here any longer. I don’t have any food. You have to go on the police and ask for ration card, and this way, we will have more food, so you can stay here. I begged him, and I said, “I’m not going to eat nothing. I’m going to drink just water. I don’t want to go to the police,” because I knew if I go to the police, that’s it. But, somehow, he got a little softer, and he kept me. One day the bombs, you know the American planes came...
LF: Bombers.
GK: Yeah the bombers came there, so we went all in the basement. We went to the basement, and she was also very religious and she started to pray, to pray with the beads, and then she said to me, “Genia, pray in your own way.” So I prayed. In the middle of the bombs, it was fire and she said to me, “Genia, [phrase in Polish]...It is sure that the Jews killed our Jesus, our God.” You know, if I translate this: “It is sure that the Jews killed our God, Jesus.” What could I say? I make believe that I didn’t hear what she said. Because I depend on her, I’m in her hands, I’m in her house, and all surrounded with the German soldiers, I didn’t have no place where to go. I didn’t have nobody to call to help me, I didn’t know who’s alive and who not. But...it was late in March, it was March 28, 1948, I was liberated.
LF: How were you liberated?
GK: The Russians came in.
LF: The Russians came in.
GK: So because the war was to end in May 1945, but I was liberated March 28, 1945.
LF: And where did you go?
GK: I didn’t have any money, and I didn’t have shoes, so I begged her, “Borrow to me a pair of shoes, and I will repay for them.” So she gave me a pair of shoes, and she gave me a pair of stockings, and she gave me and the other two girls, too, because they came back to her, and it was a full party that the war is over, the war is over. It wasn’t over, but for them it was over. And we all went to Krakow. I went to Krakow. And I was looking there was a Jewish organization in Krakow, and I was looking, maybe somebody survive from my family. If I could survive Auschwitz, because Auschwitz everybody knew, they didn’t know what kind of a death, how the Jews were dying, but they know that to Auschwitz is only one door to go in, but no door to go out. And if I could go out from this kind of a death camp, because this was called the death camp, so maybe somebody from my family survived. I was running around in Poland, all different cities, but I didn’t find nobody, from my own family.
LF: And then where did you recuperate? Where did you get yourself together?
GK: I was in Krakow. I remained in Krakow, because this was a very known city for me. I used to be in Krakow very, very often. And I find there a family from Berlin, but they were during the war in Wisnicz, and they knew my parents. So they helped me. They took me in their apartment, and she lent...
LF: A Jewish family?
GK: A Jewish family.
LF: And they survived?
GK: They survived, yeah, they are, in 1936, I think all the Jews, the Polish Jews were sent out from Germany to Zbonszyn, and this was a family from Zbonszyn.
LF: I see.
GK: They was running, Jews run. Jews don’t sit in one place. So they came to Krakow, from Krakow when was judenrein, they came to Wisnicz, and from Wisnicz, everybody know each other, because we didn’t have work to do. We didn’t do any business, any work, nothing. We was talking to each other. There was no television, no radio, no papers, but everybody told stories and stories, and this how we survived. And whatever we had, we shared with each other. The whole city was like one family. Whatever one family had, the other family had. When my mother used to bake challes [Sabbath bread] for Shabbes she gave to this a little bit, to them a little bit. We shared with everybody. And so, I came there, and I heard, I came to Krakow and I heard that he’s there, the name was Lieblich, two brothers Lieblich. I will never forget the two brothers. I have them on the picture. So they were very happy to see me, and they took me to their apartment, and they lent to me a sewing machine, and I start to sew, and I make the first hundred zlotys. This was like that much cost one pair of stockings. But somehow I was dressed. I had one skirt and one white blouse. For three months I was wearing the gray skirt and the white blouse. And every single night I washed the white blouse. In the morning I iron, and nobody knew if I had ten blouses or one blouse. Then, in Krakow, in the Jewish quarter, is a very nice synagogue. Saturday, when the Jews came to pray, so the Polish boys threw stones through the window. So I said, “No, I don’t remain on this bloody ground. Just we went through so much. Didn’t the Poles have enough that they killed so many Jews? If remained a few Jews came back from Russia, came back from the hidden places, from the woods, from the escape different places, and they gather together in Krakow, they going Saturday to the synagogue, isn’t that enough?” So I went to Germany. From Germany, I supposed to go to Palestine.
LF: Where in Germany did you go?
GK: Einring.
LF: Where is that?
GK: This is in Bayern. [Bavaria] There was a camp, and in this camp that sent the Jewish people, smuggled, not sent, smuggled the Jewish people. It was the B’richa and the B’richa [flight, escape] smuggled the Jewish people, whoever wanted to go to Palestine. And I registered, but in the meantime...
LF: Were you still with your two friends?
GK: No, we separated. I went to Krakow, and they went to Bendin. They was from Bendin. [also, Bendzin] This was close to the German border. Where am I now?
LF: You’re going to try to get to Palestine.
GK: Yeah, to Palestine. And there is a whole story. I can’t make short this story, so I will skip it. I met there somebody, and we got very friendly, and then he proposed, and I said, “I am not going to get married. I am finished my life.” I see the beautiful world, and that’s it. And then I said to him, “I will bring you a wife, my cousin.” Then I went, I smuggled, I can’t say went, because the borders weren’t open. I smuggled back to Poland and then I took this cousin...
LF: You found a cousin there?
GK: I know that she is alive. But still today I don’t know how I knew her address. She was here. She is now in Israel, and I ask her and she said, “I don’t know, I don’t know how I found her address,” and we smuggled back to Germany, and I introduced her, and we all moved from Einring to Regensburg. And then she asked me to go with her to Landsberg. There was another camp. She had there a cousin, and going to Landsberg. I heard that my cousin is there. In Landsberg, I married my cousin. He was my first cousin. Through her, I met my cousin, and when he heard that I am alive, so, of course, we didn’t separate, and we got married after six weeks.
LF: Let me change this tape now.
Tape one, side two: Other voice: This is tape two, side two, continuing an interview with Mrs. Genia Klapholz, K-L-A-P-H-O-L-Z. It will be a very, very long gap on the tape, but eventually you will hear the rest of Mrs. Klapholz’ testimony.
LF: You married your first cousin. So you met your husband, who was your first cousin.
GK: Yeah, we came to Landsberg, you know, to the camps. Nobody had a kitchen at home, we had to go to community kitchen to eat. So we went there to eat. It was on a Friday, lunch time. So I met there two girls, two sisters, by the name Klapholz. And Klapholz was my family. My mother was from home a Klapholz. So I said, “Klapholz? Are you related to us?” She said, “I don’t know; we never spoke at home about relationship from far away, but here is one man, a Klapholz from Tarnow.” So I said, “Klapholz from Tarnow is my cousin.” But I knew, because two brothers were living in Tarnow, and I said, “The older brother, I know when he went with the transport, and the younger brother went to L’vov, so I don’t know.” So my cousin and me went here to this apartment where he’s supposed to live. It was Friday night, and this man said, “Yeah, here lives a Klapholz, but he went to the Rabbi.” Friday night, usually, the religious people, they go for, not services, but Oneg Shabbat, to the Rabbi. So I said I thought that Henry is alive, but Henry is not that religious to go Friday night to the service, to the Oneg Shabbat. Anyhow, if this is, tell him please that Genia Flaks is here, and if he’s my cousin so he will probably come to visit. If not, I’m happy that another member from the family Klapholz is survived and is alive. To make the story short, Saturday we going there for lunch, and somebody grabbed me by the hand. And I take a look, it was Henry.
LF: Oh my.
GK: And right away, he hand me a pack of chocolate, because he knew that I am a big nosher [nibbler]. I like chocolate. So you can imagine this happiness, what was to me. I came in to the dining room and with such alarm! “I found my cousin! I found my cousin! I have a cousin!” It was something that it was happened that I found a million dollars, I found my cousin.
LF: Someone from your past?
GK: Yes, because I didn’t have nobody. I was the only one.
LF: You never found anyone of your family?
GK: No, and right away I took the pack chocolate, and I divide among us, and we were eating, and he didn’t let me go anymore back to Regensburg, because he was living in Munich. Then he said to me, “Listen, if you promise me that you gonna go with me to find another cousin...” He knew from two cousins. “And I will tell you who’s alive.” I said, “I promise. I promise.” So he told me Max Blonder is alive, and Max Klapholz is alive. Oh! This was to me like I didn’t know. I started to laugh, I started to cry. I didn’t know how should I be happy, should I be sad...
LF: These were all first cousins?
GK: Yeah, all first cousins. On Sunday, make sure we went to Poecking and we met first Max Klapholz. Oh, was this something! Then we went to Hof, also in Bayern, in Germany and there we met Max Blonder. I came home to Regensburg, “Oh,” I told everybody, “I have now a family again. You see why I was a survival. You see, why, because I have the family again.” And for the next Saturday, everybody came to me, and I invite everybody. I have a letter, what I wrote to Henry, when he went back to Munich. And then Henry said, “Listen, Genia, you are alone, I am alone, you go to Munich, I go to Regensburg, then we going to Hof...why should we be so separate? Let’s get married.” And sure enough, I didn’t wait even five minutes. I said, “O.K., when?” I said, “All right, we will make arrangements.” It didn’t take long. Six weeks later we got married. I said, “Listen, Henry, I want to go to Palestine.” He said, “All right, that’s fine with me. We’ll go to Palestine.” So we registered to the United States and to Palestine. And my Henry said, “Which papers will come earlier, there we’ll go. We will go to United States or to Palestine.” In the meantime I got pregnant with my older son. This was a miracle, too. Because I didn’t know, we didn’t know that we going to have any children. For two-and-a-half years, I didn’t have any period, and how, everything, our whole life is a miracle-life. Everything is a miracle. So we was waiting, and I said, “I’m not going like this to the States. Let’s wait until the baby is going to be born.” So the baby was born, it was a boy, and we got the papers to go to the American Consulate, to go to the United States, and he said, “O.K., the papers from America came before Palestine, so we go to America.” The baby was four weeks old, so I said, “Maybe we can wait until the baby is going to be a little bit older.” So we had an extension for a year. And after a year, the baby was just a year old in Bremenhafen [Bremerhaven] when we had to go on the ship.
LF: You came to Philadelphia?
GK: We came to New York. New York, on February 28, 1948, on Saturday night, 10:00, we arrived New York. So they took us to the HIAS. We didn’t have nowhere to go. And Sunday morning, I go to the lobby, I was always a big mouth, I always talk when I shouldn’t talk. I heard somebody talks German, so I go over and I ask them from where they are, and they said from Munich. I said, “From Munich, I have there an uncle and an aunt. The name is Abraham Strom.” “What, Abraham Strom? He is my best friend.” She goes to the phone and she tells some relatives came here. So, she never met us, because they were born and raised in Munich and we were born and raised in Poland. So I introduce myself, who I am, and sure enough, it didn’t take more than maybe two hours, my uncle came to the HIAS. And I met him for the first time, and after a long talk, I don’t know if you know Jewish. He said to me, “Hob nisht kein moyre.” [Don’t be afraid]. “Vet zein voyle au Amerke. Dein man vet machen a leben. Un du est ausgang...” So, I said, “Uncle, vos zogst du? Ich vul ausgang?” By us ausgang, that mean that I am dead, that I die. And Henry mach a leben, that mean that he will go out with other girls and I will sit home and die.
LF: But he didn’t mean that.
GK: No, he meant like they said in America. And he went home, Monday morning, he’s coming back and he said, “I have for you a job.” I said, “What mean, ‘you have a job.’ I don’t know the streets in New York. I don’t know English. I don’t know nothing.” “Don’t worry, I will come for you, and I will take you there.”
LF: Who would take care of the baby?
GK: My husband.
LF: Your husband.
GK: So I went to a corset factory and I worked for a week. In the meantime we had a furnished room in New York on the East Side, and then I work maybe four, five weeks and my husband got a job, too. He made $30 a week then, and I made over $50, and he said, “You are not going to go to work.” The baby would get to a nursery, I paid this time $10 a week, but the baby was crying in the morning and at night. He don’t understand English; we talk to him Jewish, and all of a sudden he’s in a strange country, in strange hands, in a strange house, in a strange language, he didn’t know, so he cried, all day he cried. So my husband said, “I didn’t marry you to go to work, and to give the baby in a nursery school. You’re going to stay home, and whatever I will make you will have enough.” So I stopped working, and then somebody came in, and they talk about the farm in New Jersey. And I fell in love with the farm. I said, “Oh, to have my own house and garden and chickens, it would be wonderful.” So sure enough my cousin Max Blonder, and my husband, they went to New Jersey and they bought a farm, and you will ask where they got money. Don’t ask, they didn’t have, but they bought a farm. And we were very, very happy, very happy. The baby was growing and growing, and the baby was three years of age, and then this family lived in Mays Landing, between Mays Landing and Egg Harbor, then we separate because it was too small for two families. We knew already that we need $50 a week to spend for food, we knew already that we need some clothes, that we need to pay for electric, for gas...
LF: How did you get to Philadelphia, then?
GK: After. In 1960, we came to Philadelphia, and so we bought, we moved to Vineland, and my cousin remained in Egg Harbor on this farm, and we bought another farm in Vineland, New Jersey. We were in Vineland, New Jersey, for ten years, and this I can tell you was our happiest ten years in the United States.
LF: What did you have, a chicken farm?
GK: We have a chicken farm, and we organized a Jewish day school in Vineland, and I worked very hard for the Jewish day school. Everything what I didn’t did. My husband took the car, he spent more money for gasoline than I made...
LF: And what brought you to Philadelphia?
GK: In 1955 was very, very bad on the farm. We couldn’t make a living. To produce a dozen eggs was 32 cents and we sold a dozen eggs for 29 cents, wholesale. So my husband, he saw that this is impossible to stay this way on the farm, so he went, and he looked for some business. I want him to go to New York, actually, because in New York my whole family is in the diamond business, in 47th Street.
LF: When you say your whole family...
GK: My cousins and his son, and his son-in-law, and his brother...
LF: But he decided to come to Philadelphia?
GK: But my husband said in New York maybe he will make $50 a week, and maybe $100 a week, and he don’t know... “I have to support...” In the meantime, I had the other baby, “I have to support a family, a wife and two children, so I have to find something where I can get, where I can made bread.” So we came to Philadelphia to a broker, and the broker told us about this grocery we bought on 54th Street, a grocery delicatessen. We were there for five years.
LF: 54th and where?
GK: In Montgomery.
LF: O.K.
GK: And we worked five years, seven days a week, very hard work. We suppose to close up Sunday noon, but wintertime it was night time, the summer time we close 1:00 or 2:00. After then we moved from there because of the Shvartses [Blacks, African-Americans] there. We moved to Gainor Road. But we were very happy in the United States, and we work a lot for Israel. And we did, I wouldn’t say that we did our share, but is not enough whatever we do, but we went to Israel every second year, beginning in 1966. Every year we couldn’t afford, couldn’t afford, but every second, every third year, we went to Israel, and we visited the whole country from Sharm-el-Sheikh to Metulla...
LF: How many of your relatives do you feel have survived, do you know, have survived?
GK: From my family, only I am a survivor, I mean, the cousins, four. My husband was the fifth.
LF: Your husband was the fifth?
GK: Yeah.
LF: And how many are in Israel?
GK: This is not first cousins, this is all second cousins. And some are adopted cousins. I have an adopted family. I adopted in Vineland a sister, I adopted a brother-in-law, I.. . and they adopted me. I have a whole adopted family.
LF: You’re a very warm, wonderful person.
GK: Thank you. I had here for two months, she came before Pesach and stood after the unveiling for my husband, a cousin, she’s not my cousin, she’s an adopted cousin. I had an adopted cousin who passed away just recently. I adopted a large family, and this and everybody in Israel is my family.
LF: You’re not bitter from what happened?
GK: Now I am very bitter because a half of my life is gone. Me and my husband was one life. God put us together, and I thought nothing could part us, only death. And the death came too early. My husband was the most healthiest man. He was never sick. I was the sick one. I am on medication since I was liberated, for the last thirty-some years, and I was always the sick one, and he was the healthy one, and I could bet on my everything that my husband will outlive me. And when this came, they poisoned him, it’s a bitter shock to me. God part us early. He was the most wonderful husband, a devoted father, and a very good grandfather, but he didn’t live to see the younger grandchild. She was born in March.
LF: Well, thank you very, very much, Mrs. Klapholz.
GK: You’re welcome. I didn’t tell you not even I would say half, not even ten percent, because I couldn’t bring out everything to make so short. I want to make short and to the point, and I think I didn’t come to the point.
LF: You did come to the point. You did come to the point.
GK: Because I think left out so many things during the war, what we went through in the ghettoes, the Entlausings [delousings], and the roll calls, and all the things what happened, that my mind got blank, because I want to always skip, skip, skip.
LF: So some time, if you want to talk again, I’ll give you my phone number and you can give me a call, and maybe we can do another tape that will kind of complement this tape.
GK: Maybe.
This was typical Friday night observance in a traditional home.
G.K. must mean 1945.
October 28, 1938, Jews of Polish nationality were deported from Germany to Zbonszyn (also spelled Zbaszyn).
B’richa, also transliterated as Beriha, was the Jewish underground movement to Palestine.
Her uncle tries to assure her that her husband will be able to make a living in America, and that she can socialize.
GENIA KLAPHOLZ [2-1- PAGE 17]
PAGE From the collection of the Gratz College Holocaust Oral History Archive GENIA KLAPHOLZ [2-2- PAGE 25] From the collection of the Gratz College Holocaust Oral History Archive
