William Ungar, 2/21/1990
WH: What year did you come here, to the United States?
WU: I came in – the first boat, the Marine Flasher, May 20th, 1946.
WH: I came here in June of 1946, also. I was a baby. I came here on the Uruguay, which was a boat that came –
WU: A month earlier.
WH: You came on the first boat?
WU: The first boat? You don’t tell, my friend that I did not come on the Mayflower, but on the Marine Flasher. This was the first boat. It took off from Bremenhaven.
WH: Right.
WU: It was a send off from the American Ambassador there. And we arrived here, in New York on May 20th, 1946. This was the first (inaudible) was a military boat. Most of us came from the D.P. Camp in Berlin, (needs translations – Schlockmenzay.) And there, I went to Bremenhaven, and we wait about 8 -10 days. And from there, they had a send off from the American ambassador, and we came to New York.
WH: Did someone here sponsor you?
WU: Well, actually, I had here a brother and some relatives who send in an affidavit to the Joint Distribution. But before that, I received some correspondence to the Joint Distribution – so that, so I did not ask for any help from the Joint Distribution. Whatever, pay them back for the cost of bringing me here, except for the first $15 dollars that they gave everyone who boarded the boat coming here.
WH: Where you seasick on the journey?
WU: No.
WH: What did you do in those days, in the 13days, or how long did it take, the trip?
WU: The trip, probably, about 8 -10 days.
WH: It took you 8 or 10 days.
WU: The military. We were mostly on the deck. The weather was nice, I always enjoy the sun and the fresh air. And I came here with a niece of mine too, who survived. But she was in Russia. And I was able to bring her over from Russia to Poland and then to Berlin and to bring her over here so that I can say –
WH: How were you able to bring her over right after the war? In other words, where were you during the war?
WU: Well –
WH: Or, where was the last place you were?
WU: It’s a long story, (short laugh) because – I actually started the war, there was a mobile action in the Polish army in 1939.
WH: Uh-uh.
WU: And it was sent to the Western front, sort to say. And then briefly, I was wounded on the (inaudible) when the Germans attacked. I was in the artillery. So, usually we were defending the infantry was in front of us, but then when the infantry started to withdraw, then we were on the first line, so while we were withdrawn, I was wounded, and brought over to the hospital, and then was captured by the Germans, the whole – the whole hospital became a war prisoner. Even the hospital, with the Germans. And because I was not able to work and that time there was the Hitler, Stalin pact. They allowed to transfer Polish citizen from the East of Poland territory, they allowed, they were occupied by the Russians to the West. And from the West Ukrainian to go to the East.
WH: Uh, uh.
WU: They released me on crutches, because I was not able to do, at the Labor Campt, and they let me go. The Germans.
WH: They didn’t know that you were Jewish?
WU: Well, - at the beginning this was at the end, this was still 1939. They know that I’m Jewish, but the military uniforms, they still, they had some sort of a respect for the military. They had enough civilians to round up. So the military, they did not treat too harsh at the beginning. And so, this is a story by itself that I came to the border between Russia and Poland at that time. It was in (inaudible) that the river divided the –
WH: I’m laughing because my family is from there.
WU: The river divided the East and West (inaudible). So, when I left it was Poland, it was Eastern Poland, it was near the border of the prewar Russian, and then when I came back, the Russian occupied in December 7th, 1939. The territories and they enacted the Western and Ukrainian, it was in Eastern Poland. So, I came back, (inaudible) home, and stayed there for the rest. And then I came back and they already (inaudible). There’s a whole story. That they come to the border. The Russian didn’t let me in. They didn’t want to just accept me just like that.
WH: Uh, uh.
WU: Anyway, so then I stayed at home until the beginning of the school year. And then I was a, a teacher (inaudible) in a technical high school before the war. In Luvov.
WH: In Luvov. How old were you at that time?
WU: Pardon me?
WH: How old were you at that time?
WU: Well, that I’m old (WU pauses to think of his age at that time) twenty-five years.
WH: You were born in 1914?
WU: It was 1913.
WH: 1913. I see. And where were you born? What’s, what –
WU: In Poland. This was (? Krasner?) .
WH: (Kras - ?)
WU: It’s a small village. You know, it’s not –(? Krasner?) there are two (? Krasners?) .
WH: I heard of (? Krasnovvbrod?) also.
WU: Krasnod?
WH: ? Krasnovbrod?
WU: Oh, yeh. This is (? Krasner?) .
WH: And where is that?
WU: And this was near the rivers (inaudible) on the border, prewar border between Russia and Poland, and this was near a small town, it was like (inaudible). It was east of (inaudible). The gubernatorial seat.
WH: So was it near (? Jessuv?) , (? Shervorsk?)
WU: No, it was on the route, on the route from (? Jemolivef?) to Luvov, which was brought there, (inaudible).
WH: Near Galicia? It was in Galicia?
WU: In Galicia, yeh.
WH: Right, right.
WU: So, before the First World War was Eastern Galicier.
WH: My father came from a town, not too far from there.
WH: With a name?
WH: Lansut.
WU: Langford?
WH: Lansut.
WU: OH, Lansut. Lansut.
WH: It’s near (? Jessove?) .
WU: Yeh. Near (? Jessove?) . This is more west.
WH: Right.
WU: Towards Cracow.
WH: You were closer to Lulov.
WU: East. East of - .
WH: Near (? Shemish?) .
WU: East of (Shemish?) .
WH: Ah-h. I know where it is. It -.
WU: (? Shemish?) was divided, the river (inaudible) divided the Eastern part along to the Russian after the annexation of the Eastern, -of, Eastern Poland. And the Western belongs to the Germans. And now it belongs to present Poland.
WH: Right.
WU: But the waters is still there, in existence.
WH: Right. So did you go back to (? Krasner?) after, after the army released you?
WU: Yeh.
WH: Any, I’m interested in the story, but I also want to talk about afterwards, so i-
WU: Afterwards, anyway, afterwards I cam to the United States in 1946.
WH: I just have one question though. You were in the camps during the war?
WU: Yes. Yeh.
WH: In, in –
WU: I was in (inaudible). In Luvov there was a camp.
WH: You were in (inaudible).
WU: (inaudible) the extermination camps, but there’s not much know, except in Yad Vashem, is the name there in front of all the extermination camps, now it will come probably even more know, because the archives have been open now, because it was under the Russians. The Russian occupied it, and nobody had access to it, except the one who survived there, and very few survived there.
WH: But I know, you know, of course the book about (? Genofska?) Road.
WU: Yeh.
WH: The (? Genofska) Road, by –Welichter. Leon Wells, right?
WU: There’s another book that’s being published now (inaudible), as a matter of fact I picked it up in Israel, by a gentleman by the name of (? Shanefeld?) . Also, who was translated into Hebrew. I have the Hebrew text. And it is the destruction of Luvov. And the camp, (? Unofska?) .
WH: Where in the camp where you?
WU: Where?
WH: In what part of the camp where you?
WU: No, this is a story by itself you see, because (coughing) - .
WH: I’m very interested in it because I happen to know about that camp, because, number one, I interviewed, I interviewed Wells, I’ve read his book. I also interviewed a man in Atlanta, Georgia, who was in the (? Unofska?) Road Camp. And his name is “Wind”. Do you know him?
WU: No. NO. I know only one who is in Israel, a very close friend of mine, by the name of Chaim Rosen.
WH: I know that name.
WU: he was in, in the camp. In fact, with him we worked together, went to schools together, and then we worked together, and we tried to survive together. Anyways, because I worked on the alien documents.
WH: Uh, uh.
WU: So my name was “Edward Weber”.
WH: Warber?
WU: Weber. This is W-E-B-E-R. This is, also this is a story by itself. In as much as –
WH: Okay, maybe we’ll leave it for the moment. But you were there, and –
WU: And I escaped.
WH: Any you escaped.
WU: I escaped, yeh.
WH: I know that there was an escape. But did you escape with a group?
WU: No, this is a – I escaped in a very, in a very unusual way. In a very miraculous way.
WH: I would like to hear about that.
WU: This, I have to step back a little bit. Because )? spelling) was the camp itself, and then it was (? spelling) was a labor camp. And then, there was also, they German base, where they did all the (? remounting) to the repair, or the maintenance of their military equipment. So, your group from the Technical High School, the Jewish, the engineers, the teacher and so forth and so on, after they, they (inaudible) from there, that we did the training, were sent over there to this group, to this (?) . They have to stay, sleep there in (?) and work there in the, like in, in the labor camp. And they are in change of this, was a Captain Hartman. Who was very friendly towards the Jews and he tolerated them, and he actually gave them the ability to survive as much as he could. So, it’s a long story, I have my document, I went to Warsaw, and back and forth. I went to Germany. Couldn’t stay there, I came back, and this Hartman allowed me to work there daytime together with my group, friends, and in the evening to go to the alien quarter to sleep.
WH: Weren’t you afraid that someone would give you away?
WU: See, that’s exactly what happened. Let’s say, that’s exactly – after a few months, you know what happened. But unfortunately, you see, I don’t like to mention it, but I don’t mind to tell it, that this was done by a Jew, not by nobody else. This was the head of the thi slabor camp, by the name of Teitlebaum, Tennenbaum.
WH: Oh?
WU: Tennenbaum. And he turned me in. That I didn’t know, and anyway, -
WH: This Tennenbaum, is he the same one –
WU: He’s not the same on that (inaudible).
WH: Not Jacob Tennenbaum?
WU: This one is in Brooklyn. He was in another camp. No, I inquired when I heard the name, I inquired. But this is not the same.
WH: I have a question about that, that I would like you. Doesn’t I t happen sometimes, that in the survivor community in America, there are probably a few people who know to have acted this way during the war. Right?
WU: Yah.
WH: What happens to such people in America?
WU: You see, it’s unfortunately or fortunately, I don’t know how or what term to use, not many of them survive, you see. Because during the time of the ghetto, they thought to call it the (inaudible), that they Jews were involved. Now, some are very honest (inaudible) and they thought that it would enable them to survive and they will do this orderly function, they’ll see that (inaudible) should be clean, you know, inside the, the children should go to school, or the children should not be hurt on the street. They didn’t know what’s there for the future. But then things have changes, they are giving assignments, for quotas to bring so many people. Then they had to go and to find them, this is the organized for Judenrat, and to organize through the police or the Jewish policeman, and it became a very serious problem, see. But, at the end, when I talked about Luvov, at the end they were called all in, new machine time to put it briefly, So most of them, or 90 or 95% of them, were killed. By the Germans.
WH: In Lovov.
WU: So very few actually survived.
WH: Well, I thought to myself, you know, that like in some cases, like Wells mentions in ? Winoska? Road he mentions how sometimes the Jewish militia, the (inaudible), were called in, and they were told, “You must give us 5 Jews” If you don’t, then we will take you own family.” What was a person to do under such circumstances?
WU: That’s correct. They could do many things, you see. If you want to sacrifice his life is one thing, or else he could run away and not turn him in. He didn’t have to do it. You see - .
WH: But you couldn’t run in the ghetto if you were already there.
WU: Well, you could always could escape from the ghetto, you see, could not – unless you had a place where to hide, you see. But otherwise - .
WH: You know, I m just thinking to myself. You know, American Jews like to pass judgments on people and say, “You should have done this, I would have done this” But I always thing that, you know, we learn that you shouldn’t judge another person until you are in their position.
WU: Yeh, exactly.
WH: Until you come to their place.
WU: Well, that’s why, this here, we – with the saying here, you know Hebrew?
WH: (Responds in Hebrew). Did you go to the University in Warsaw, also? Did you study there?
WU: No, I studied in Warsaw for education, you see.
WH: When?
WU: 1939.
WH: Right before the war?
WU: Right before the war, you see. Because I was an instructor on the technical high school. In order to get a license, to teach one or two – seminars in Warsaw, then I was in Warsaw and then I came back and then get a license and so forth and so on. And then the war broke out.
WH: Aha. You had finished gymnasium.
WU: Yeh.
WH: Gymnasium.
WU: Yah. This, (needs translation). That was a (needs translation). A technical gymnasium.
WH: I see. I see.
WU: But then later on, I went here. You see, I was always dreamt to become an engineer.
WH: What kind of engineer?
WU: A mechanical engineer.
WH: And when you came here to America?
WU: And when I came here to America, I went to City College (inaudible).
WH: Oh, I’m teaching (inaudible). I - - you know, okay in the ghetto –
WU: This goes way back, way back. It goes back (inaudible). After the first year, you see, for me I felt to learn English, I may as well learn English and go to college.
WH: Uh, uh (yes.)
WU: To go to college. SO that’s how I started and I found out that City College at that time was free, but you have to be one year resident of New York, so the first year I went there. And, so, as a matter of fact, it’s, it’s very involved, because I end up without any, having any documents, you see. The only documents that I have, was this Edward Weber. I didn’t have my own name here. You know what I mean?
WH: Uh, uh (yes).
WU: But the only thing that I did have, was a certificate from the – the Polytechnic in Luvov, when the Russian camp was there, that I attended there, the first year, at the Polytechnic, then when they returned, when they were liberated, after I have a certificate where I even draw it up myself for the second year. In all this, what I went through, and so forth and so on, because I wasn’t sure if I was even capable of doing anything, so I ended up myself to the high school to learn English. Except to learn just English, (inaudible) to see what’s all the – involved here. I didn’t - .
WH: You didn’t know any English when you came here?
WU: Didn’t know English, no. So and then I felt the (inaudible) here, and (inaudible) go to the City College in the evening, you see. They had (inaudible) evening courses, I didn’t go in the daytime. I worked.
WH: What were you working at?
WU: This also, it’s a very inter- very unusual, it’s a , - it’s a very fortunate coincidence, that after I came over, I came over in May. Then June, July was vacation, you see, and the, - the HIAS, and the New American gave me names of two or three places to go to look for a job. So I went to one of them. It was (? closed to publication?) , and then I came to the second one, which is a machine company, which was loading machinery to produce envelopes. By the name of Ethel Schmidt. An old German machine company. They are there before the First World War, their name was Smidt.
WH: I see.
WU: ‘dt. Smidt. BUT, it was not so popular during the First World War, so they changed it to “Smith”. After the Second World War, it was no so popular again to be German, so they changed it to “Smithe”.
WH: Smyth?
WU: Smithe.
WH: I see.
WU: And they gave me a test, a technical test on blueprints, it’s a mechanical test, and they accepted me, without any questions, without any knowing the English, nothing. Just, ah, you interested in my knowledge in building their machines, and I worked there, too, for five years. This is my first, and the only position in the United States. So, I worked there for – on the building this machines from the ground floor. (Inaudible) and doing research and development and try to deal with the chief engineer, by the name of Novick. Then, as a result of it, I never dreamt to become a businessman. You see, I was more interested in the educational aspect, or in teaching.
WH: You would have been a teacher or a professor in Europe if the war hadn’t broken out. You became a businessman because of this.
WU: If I would have access to higher education, but in Poland before the war, it is not an easy access to high education, at that time, several students (inaudible) was killed in Luvov, by the name of ? Salameir? if you know (inaudible). That the students are the Polytechnic in Luvov. The Jewish have to sit on the right side, and the other on the other. You see? And there was very great disturbances, so forth and so on. And they – the territory was a, ex-territorial, that police could not come in regardless what wouldn’t happen at exams of the Polytechnic, the University, unless the Director asked him to come in. So, several students were hurt, and even killed. One, a neighbor or ours. Anyways, so I enrolled myself at City College, and went in the daytime I worked, at this Ethel Smithe, and in the evening I went to college, and then even later, when I had already my business established, in 1951, 52, I still decided to see to complete it, and I worked until 1955.
WH: Until 1955. .
WU: Seven and a half years. Cuase I was I was anxious to –
WH: So how far did you go?
WU: Accomplish, to (inaudible) completing mechanical engineering.
WH: And did you complete it?
WU: Yeh. In 1955. so, (inaudible) to say that at night, and the daytime I went to business, and the evening I went to City College, and at night already, my first daughter was born, the one who is now in Israel. She was crying all night, and I had to take care of the baby.
WH: You didn’t have much time, did you?
WU: That’s how I started it. That’s how I started the business. That’s how I built it up, so as a result that I was working with this Ethel Smithe Machine Company, I had a thorough knowledge about the machines to manufacture envelope. It turn out, this was the only one in the United Sates, with a patent on the equipment. It was like a monopoly. They even, they were even collecting the royalties on every envelope that was produces, one for every thousand envelope, one has to pay him a penny at that time. And the interesting part was, that they would not sell anybody equipment who is not a member of the Association, of the Manufacturer Envelope (inaudible) Association. (Inaudible) the Association, you had to be able to buy the equipment. So then it became a problem, about getting the equipment, you see. To get the equipment, to be able to finance this whole thing. So this is a story by itself. That mainly, I had a very close friend, because I was active in the Zionist movement, and there was a (needs translation – nasheri) in Poland, and you have to go to Israel and so forth and so on, but then things have changed, the other way around, and a friend of mine, (inaudible) he became a friend, he went to Cuba. Because it was not so easy to get a certificate before the war to Palestine, as you know. And I was in corresponding with him, and then when he found out that I’m alive, he came and visit me here, and he asked me to come over there. (Inaudible) he and his brother –in-law were in photographic business. A very big, several stores there. And he is one, actually, who told me, “Look, you better forget about your education. It you want to accomplish something, you go into business” Because he was already 47, 48 years, about 8, 10 years in Cuba. So then he invited me to come to Cuba, and I got a deal with him and his brother-in-law, that they’ll back me up financially, we’ll be partners, they put up x amount of money, and I should put in a certain amount of money, and then go into business, in the same manufacturing the envelopes.
WH: What year was that?
WU: This was ’49,’49, ’50. But this was a matter, first they felt that I should go into photographer with them, they’ll open a store in Miami. And I stayed there over the Christmas vacation, and tried to learn their business, photography, so forth and so on. But then I was not too enthused about it. So they said, “Why don’t you try and go with what you know best.” And that I end up in the manufacturing of envelopes. And this, so of course I could not get the equipment. But I was very friendly with the Chief Engineer, and it is Ethel Smithe, there were only two Jews besides me on the whole – so the Chief Engineer was a Jew, and another old guy (inaudible) there a Jew.
WH: Novack was - .
WU: Novack. And then somebody else was there a Jew, a machinist, and I was the only one, the third one, (inaudible) accepted. He (inaudible) very well, and (inaudible) very friendly with him. Through the group, (inaudible) their children.
WH: When did you set up your own business? What year was that?
WU: This was a (inaudible) you couldn’t get - .
WH: You couldn’t set it up, they had a monopoly on it.
WU: They had a monopoly.
WH: So how did you?
WU: Yeh, so, so I found out from this Chief Engineer (inaudible) was very helpful to me. And he told me “Look, if you’re prepared to manufacture the envelopes at night, and go out the daytime to sell them, you go in, otherwise don’t start” To get the equipment, I thought now that there’s another small company who produces plunger machines. You have to know the terms, which I use for the - in the industries. They were wide rangers, wide range windows, it plunged away obsolete the machines which were already from the 19th century, or (inaudible) 20th. Very obsolete equipment, see, and they stopped producing them. “Why don’t you go out and contact them to see if they would manufacture for them.” So that’s what I did, you see. I went to Springfield, contracting there to make those plunger equipment. Three machines, took much longer what I anticipated, so that I had no time to go out myself there, for the – spend bout a week or ten days to finish up the first machine. He brought out the first machine, I –I rented a place on Mott Street, 232 Mott Street. And registered the name, put in an announcement, I was already in business. So it’s lucky that I was already in business as a legitimate manufacturer of envelopes, regardless how or what (inaudible) I’m making, then they were willing to sell me their equipment.
WH: Smithe?
WU: Smithe. Yes.
WH: And so, you bought their equipment?
WU: bought those three pieces of equipment you see, and started off with the business there, in ’52. It was a very small area, it was only 1600 square feet, the whole set – the whole setup was (inaudible) and then at most, and two years later, at Queens. 24th Street. And there, we start to buy the Smithe Equipment. A plunger, I sell for $50 which I paid $15,000 and I disposed them.
WH: They were now obsolete?
WU: They were obsolete, you see, But just to start with, I had no alternative. I could not get the equipment. See, on the later one, the Justice Department was after them, because people start to complain.
WH: Oh, you mean after Smithe?
WU: After Smithe.
WH: Because of the monopoly (inaudible). They just went after them on their own?
WU: Some may have complained to the Justice Department, so they were after them, and they, they discontinued the royalty.
WH: Uh, uh.
WU: I still pay the royalty to them. (Inaudible) handle with who manufacture.
WH: You still pay the royalty?
WU: Not now, but at that time.
WH: I know, but at that time.
WU: At that time, so then after the Justice Department is after them, then they discontinue. (Inaudible) I think was not to sell the equipment. But being sold the equipment I say, they’re the only one. So they didn’t care about selling the equipment. They told them, “Look, you have to put in a deposit, 50%, 25%. The machine was already about two years. Three years.
WH: Okay. Now, eventually, the business grew into what it is now. Right?
WU: Yeh.
WH: It kept growing, you kept investing, you kept building, and of course in the beginning, you even had to take chances. I mean, you had to borrow money from the bank, you didn’t know for sure if you would have the business to pay it back.
WH: Oh, yeah.
WH: How much business do you do today?
WU: Well, let me see. The business is, the business really grew from that time, that we are now, we are probably, one or maybe the only privately owned company. The largest in the United States.
WH: You are the largest in the United States.
WU: Privately owned. You see, we have - .
WH: What public?
WU: Eight companies in seven states, there is a substantial amount of envelopes.
WH: I’ll bet.
WU: And we have also, diversified that we also manufacture business forms. You know, those – business from the print-out that you receive various reports.
WH: Oh, yes.
WU: (WU shows WH forms) We manufacture now, we bought a company two years ago and we manufacture those too.
WH: I see.
WU: So, but because we are privately owned company, I say, so we do not reveal our figures, or we do not even register till the – or rated with Dunn and Bradstreet. But do you have – just two. To give you and idea, well, I would rather – I don’t like to talk with numbers, except, to give you an idea, that do have let’s say, on our payroll, let’s say, I give you this number, will give you some sort of picture of what we have. We employ now, close to 2,000 people.
WH: That’s a lot of people. How many envelopes do you produce a year. If you have to give a round figure?
WU: It’s also a lot of envelopes.
WH: Many millions, right?
WU: Many – what?
WH: Millions, and millions of envelopes.
WU: We produce many millions a day!
WH: A day? The figure is beyond me, already, from what you say, but there’s (inaudible) twenty million a day? Ten million a day?
WU: Yeh. Much more than that, you wee. We produce, to give you an idea, we produce more than 10 million a day in this, in this unit that’s up here, the headquarters of ours. But that New York Envelope, goes in by itself, we produce more than 10 million a day. We operate in two shifts. Around the clock. The equipment is very expensive. And it requires a substantial capital investment, and then it (inaudible) to utilize the equipment.
WH: I see, so you have to operate 24 hours a day.
WU: We operate twenty four hours a day, and we are producing a substantial number.
WH: Would I be wrong if I said that with all the pants together, maybe 50 million envelopes a day?
WU: We probably are. Or a little more.
WH: And is it called New York Envelope whatever it is?
WU: We have two groups, I said. The New York Envelope group, in which is all the – the whole operation is organized in two groups. There is New York Envelope group, which consists of New York Envelope, and Envelope Converters in Brooklyn, and Champion in New Jersey. And the other group is the national group. Which is National North in Worcester, the National South, in Georgia. National with west. And Kansas City. And the national center in St. Louis.
WH: St. Louis? I lived there 4 years.
WU: OH, yeh?
WH: That’s interesting.
WU: Then we have Churchill Business Forms which is in Connecticut.
WH: How many business forms do you produce a day?
WU: Yeh, well, this is already – this goes in - .
WH: The –
WU: We count it differently, see, and there it goes in the (inaudible). I wouldn’t guess, see, because it varies in the – here it is uniform. Over there, different (inaudible). IT’s two forms, one form, single forms, different forms. (WU breaks to answer the telephone).
WH: A question to me, a couple of questions come to mind on this subject. And if, in what was, I mean, my tape is still going, so yours must be going.
WU: Yeh, mine’s going.
WH: Right, And you have a 90 minute tape there?
WU: Yeh.
WH: Alright, so we’ll go in a few minutes, it’ll go off, the you just have to switch it over.
WU: It’s alright.
WH: You know that there are all many different types of people in the world, many different types of survivors. I – and some survivors who are wealthy are not involved, as we discussed before. And the others are. Some don’t want to remember what happened in any way, some don’t get involved in councils. You’re extremely involved. You’re on the major councils, and you are involved in mayn causes, could you tell me a little bit about why you made this decision after the war, to – or, I don’t know when you made it, maybe in the 60’s you started becoming involved, I’m not sure. But, could you tell me first, how you became involved, in the various causes, and I know that you are also involved with United Synagogue, how you became involved, and why you decided to be involved.
WU: That’s a good question. You see, - my background is such, that I grew up in a home with an Orthodox environment. Then I went to school in a small village, (inaudible) a small village, you see. Then I went to school already in a big city, and there I became involved with my background, in the Zionist movement. In the Labor Zionist Movement, so we say, the Youth Movement. And I was active there, based on my background, and my experience during the Holocaust, I found that I remained alive thanks to two reasons, you see. From the religious point of view, I would say that the (inaudible) happened form (needs translation) a Divine design, of (inaudible). And I had it, I’m convinced because I had various dreams and so forth and so on. It’s one way and the – and the other hand - .
WH: During the war you had those dreams?
WU: Yah. But on the other hand, people helped me. And it’s strains me to say, but I have to admit it, that the most anti-Semitic part in, during the period of the Holocaust, (inaudible) Ukrainians, and the Poles. Now both of them helped me. One is a Pole who gave me his documents under Edward Weber without any payment whatsoever, and this act –totally save your life.
WH: Why? Why did he do that?
WU: Just, just out of humane feelings.
WH: You knew him?
WU: NO, he just didn’t come over from (inaudible) save your life, you see. I was there, the instructor, he was there, a student was there. So it’s a story by itself, you see, for a year we know each other and so forth and so on, and then he said, “Here is my paper.” And he gave me, and I have the (inaudible) today, even a birth certificate, you could not get only one regular birth certificate.
WH: Right, so he –
WU: He gave me the birth certificate with his school certificate with the understanding that he’s giving it to me, but I should not – (inaudible).
WH: Had you done anything for him (inaudible) that made him feel -.
WU: Pardon me?
WH: Had you ever done anything for him that made him feel indebted to you?
WU: Just that personal relationship.
WH: Just as friends?
WU: And then, you could – this was, the documents actually saved my life. The other, that really saved my life is when I escaped from the concentration camp and I had to find a place where to hide, I have hiding in an apartment, or in, in a building, that I lived there before the German occupied, and this was (inaudible) at that time, in Luvov. And the superintendent was Ukrainian. As a result of the area, to the (inaudible) area, all the Jews and all the some of the aliens and to move out, and the Gestapo occupied the building that I lived there before. And the Ukrainians was hiding me in the basement through all this time. So the whole buid – END OF SIDE ONE TAPE ONE
