United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Israel Gruzin
June 30, 1994
RG-50.030*0088
PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a videotaped interview with Israel Gruzin, conducted by Joan Ringelheim on June 30, 1994 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview took place in Washington, DC and is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
ISRAEL GRUZINPRIVATE
June 30, 1994
Q: Can you tell us your name and where and when you were born?
A: I would be delighted. My name is Israel Gruzin. I born in Lithuania, in Slobodka, they say in a place I born in 1928, December the 28th but now I am putting myself on May the 4th, and I am going to tell you the story.
Q: You're going to tell us the story later?
A: Right.
Q: Tell us a little bit about your life in Slobodka and about your family and your brothers and sisters, if you have any?
A: I had a brother, of course. I was born in Lithuania, in Slobodka, in Vilijampole. We had a normal life. My father was not a millionaire but he made a nice living. He was doing some business with Russians and things like this, and it was binders from boot sales and selling this from the houtgarba(ph) to make leather out of it. I was going to school. I was going, of course, to Cheder, a Hebrew school and my brother the same thing. And we was going on a normal life. Of course, we had the little- the Lithuanians was not always with Jews. There was stories all over the place, but we had a normal life and living like normal people, and then, of course, in 1940 came the Russians because the war started already with the Germans. It was not a war yet, but when the Germans came to Polandbut the Russians came to Lithuania and then the Russians occupied Lithuania close to a year, and then the war started in 1940.
Q: Tell me what changed when the Russians came.
A: It was a little different because you willI was going to a, to Hebrew school and then all of a sudden I was going to a Jewish school. They are cutting down on the religious part. They were trying to make all the children like sort like patriotic and, of course, when you're young you think is the future. But my father was always against the regime because of Communism. In fact, he got arrested one time. One time he got a chicken he was carrying this to the street and he was stopped. What do you have a chicken for? And he was afraid to tell everything to go to officially. They arrested him and after a couple hours, but they let them out. They didn't want to get the men for the chicken. You can imagine my father didn't care much for the Communists. But I was not myself. I liked the movie and things like that. But it was really normal. It was a little different with the new regime, but I was too young to see the difference.
Q: Let me ask you to go back before the Russians came. You said there was a lot of Antisemitism?
A: There was because I can experience to start with, because I remember my father bought a bicycle for my brother. I was the younger and he was a year older. We were riding one time and I was saying, let me ride, let me ride, and all of sudden there was a few boys, not Jewish, and one of them got a stick and put it right in the springs and he broke the bicycle, and like young boys, of course, we chasing them. You broke the bicycle. How come you broke the bicycle? And where I was living inwe got a little farther outwas a church and we chased them to the church and, of course, course the police came out and let the two buys in and he put the foot in this door and he told us, go away you Zyds. I told them and this time, of course, I spoke. I forgot –Lithuanian, I was going born therethem I told him he broke the bicycle and he kept saying, go away. Of course, I couldn’t fight him. It was experience. We came back home and my father took this bicycle to the man that fixed the bicycle and fixed it. But you had a feeling like you were always not so welcome, like because I'm Jewish.
Q: Did you have Lithuanian friends?
A: Like I said, I was neighbors with a few of them, but in general I was in the Cheder. But in the area I was living there was Jewish people. But we had a few people from the ________ a restaurant there. His son was a little friendly with us, and we were playing as children, but didn't have too many Lithuanian friends.
Q: Did you hear about the Germans and the Nazis while the Russians were there?
