TITLE SAM GOLDBERG
I_DATE 6/18/1983 SOURCE UCLA HOLOCAUST DOCUMENTATION ARCHIVES
RESTRICTIONS
SOUND_QUALITY EXCELLENT
IMAGE_QUALITY EXCELLENT
DURATION
LANGUAGES
ENGLISH
KEY_SEGMENT
GEOGRAPHIC_NAME
PERSONAL_NAME
CORPORATE_NAME
KEY_WORDS
NOTES
CONTENTS (Checker's note: This is a full transcript; no timings) My name is Sam Goldberg, I was born in Poland. I'm in the early sixties. I attended the Gymnasium in the city of Gernov and then I attended a textile designing school. After graduation, I worked in the city of Lodz in one of the finest textile industries. My father was, I come from a religious family, there was three children in the family: an older sister, myself, and brother. My father by profession was a brewmaster. He was a religious man but a modern religious man. My mother was completely opposite direction because she was more conservative and more informed than the Jews in this way. In my house, my father wanted me to become a theologian. He wanted, his dream was that I become a rabbi some of these days or marry into a very rich wealthy Jewish family and all I had to do was sit at home, learn the Talmud, meet a nice that was all his theme was. My ideas of life were completely different to become an actor, I loved the acting business. To become something different than a theologian, OK, and I was confused, and the family was always fighting about what should become of Sam Goldberg.
Were you the first child?
No, I was the second; my sister was the oldest. So they decided, my mother decided to send me to the school which I said before, a textile school, and I went to the city of Lodz and I worked there.
My mother always used to say to my father, "You are a brewmaster, it's the only profession you are used to, why don't you teach your son to be a brewmaster too. It's a very good profession. My father always used to say, "This is a profession for a Goy, not for a Jew." This was the answer. As years passed by, in 1939 I remember when I was working in the city of Lodz, I got a telegram that my mother got very sick, and it was right before the war, and I came home to the city of Piertgov, and I find my mother in the hospital, very sick. They didn't have any good care in this small town, it was not a little town, it was a smaller town than the city of Lodz,
you know.
So this was like 1938?
1939, right before. I want to get into it, because I want to get into 1939. My mother wag very sick and we couldn't find good help in the town, so we decided to take mother into the city of Lodz, in one of the largest hospitals in the city. The surgeon in this town was a doctor by the name of Mordkevich he was a friend of the family, and we decided we were going to put her into this hospital.
They took mother into the hospital. I was the only one who went with my sister with mother to the city of Lodz. Around 1939 September 1, when my mother was supposed to be operated, war broke out, and they couldn't operate on my mother. It took a few days, the Germans occupied the city of Lodz, and they took Lodz, and the hospital was occupied by the Germans, and all the soldiers, they took all the private people who were staying in the hospital to be operated on, or the sick people and put all of them in one or two rooms, and the rest of the hospital was occupied by Polish soldiers who, you know, were shot on the front lines, they brought them in there. (5:00) In order for me to be able to visit my mother daily, which I wanted to be close to her, I loved her
Take your time.
So, back to Mordkevich. He gave me a piece of paper stating that I am an orderly in the hospital, which was easier for me to get into the hospital because the German guards didn't let in. Being an orderly in the hospital, I had to do what an orderly does, and I didn't know anything that had to be done, and so Dr. Mordkevich coached me, if they were to have an operation, you going to stay there, and help me out, and do this.
In those days it was not like today. I remember, the German doctors used to come and check the soldiers, especially the Polish soldiers. The only thing, if a soldier had a bullet in his leg, the only thing the German doctor used to say was "Ab schneiden, cut it off." Then, " No treatment just cut it off." The first time I remember, they brought in a few soldiers, and Dr. Mordekevich had to operate on the soldiers, to cut off their leg and as I was watching this operation I fell on the floor I couldn't take it. The second time, the third time I got already used to it, you know, the first time, the second time, I got used to it. All right. A few days I talked to the doctor Sporzorelli In September, I don't remember dates exactly, I know it was in the month of September.
Then doctor Mordekevich, he notifies me that my mother was going to operated on, except they're going to need some blood. So how are we going to get blood, so I volunteered to give blood. When mother heard I had to give blood, she was screaming, hollering, I think she said, "I don't want my child's blood. I just don't want it" I told her, you're going to take it. Just lies and lies, over and over and over. So finally, they took my blood and they're going to operate on her. I go to the hospital every day, it was like an ordeal, because the Germans were standing in the streets and capturing people to do their dirty work for them. So every time I had to go to the hospital in the morning, I had to watch to not be caught by Germans because I wouldn't be able to see my mother. So finally I made it day after day. Time to go home, you couldn't go home, you couldn't stay late because the only time you could go on the street was 5 or 6 o'clock, it was a spurt. One morning I come into the hospital, it was a day before Yom Kippur, I came in the morning, I walked into the room and the bed was empty A Lady was laying next to her, she said "Look in the drawer, there's a package for you." "Where is my mother?" No one wants to tell me. Finally, I find Dr. Mordkevich, he said "Your mother died on the operating table." Now here I am. Where is she? I cannot find her. Oh they put her down there, in the little house. There's a little house down there outside the hospital. It's supposed to be like a place here they keep the dead bodies. I walked in there, my poor mother was lying there. She was lying on asphalt, covered up with a blanket, and a German guard was standing outside watching. He said "Who are you I said I want to see my mother. He said are you the dog from this bitch? A Volksdeutsch. You know what a Volksdeutsch is, don't you? I say "yeah, that's my mother." Walked in there, when I was by myself laying by herself, I opened it up and sure it was my mother.
Now comes a question. I have to bury my mother. I have to give her a Jewish burial. How do you do it? I had to keep her for a day? How do you go about it? I had aunts and uncles who were afraid to go out into the cemetery. People were afraid to go, and now you have to make the takhrikhim, have to make the cover. I went home, gave the bad news to my sister and to my uncles with the situation how it was. I was the only one running back and forth because everyone was afraid to go out. I have to get a few women in this particular apartment, to find some linen, white linen, cut it up, and make it
a cover.
And now is the question how are we going to go to the cemetery, we have to go to the cemetery, so I ran out to the cemetery and talked to the caretaker, the cemetery used to have horses in the gullas(?) , and he said "I'm not going to go. (even)if you pay for it, I'll give you the horse, I give it yourself. And I had one brave uncle, He said, you were going to go with me. Went into this room, we picked up my mother, In those days we didn't bury Jewish people in caskets, we buried them in piece of wood. (10:00) So I find some wood, took my mother put in a piece, took my mother out to the gula. And here is the situation we find ourself. According to Jewish tradition, the survivor, used to walk behind the gula, always you find a Jew person who goes to the Hebrew, and says in Hebrew "Tstaka etc. If you give charity." Here I am sitting on the top, the horses are going to the cemetery, and my uncle, he goes behind the gula, but nobody's there and in the Jewish tradition when a procession, funeral, passed by, Jewish people used to close the doors, and walk a few steps with the gula, to say goodbye to the dead person. Here I am, sitting on the top, and nobody is there, to walk up the few steps, nobody there to say "Staka etc." I say, this process, the woman I love so much deserved this, My mind came to think this "My God, What? Why? Why? Finally I arrived at the cemetery, I have to wash the body, according to Jewish tradition I have to wash the body, There were a few Jewish women there who were sitting there to help me out. of course you pay them now we have to take out the
body.
There was just on guy there, finally I talked him into helping me to dig the grave, to go out to the travest, where the body was, to take the body and bring it to the grave. In this particular instance, two German guards go with us, and I asked my uncle, what they are doing, and what are they afraid of, what are we going to do in the cemetery, we going to steal some bodies? My uncle says to me, don't say anything. Fine, I put my mother in the grave, I covered her with everything, I did all the Jew tradition that was supposed to be done. When I was done the German was outside yelling "Schnell, Schnell," very loud. So I was working in the grave, covering everything up, and he spit on me. The other German guy said leave him alone, his time will come. So finally when I covered her up, I went outside, me and my uncle, and I have to say Kaddish.
After I buried her, I tried to get home, but there was no transportation this was Yom kippur, a moment, couple hours before people go to Kol Nidrei, when I cam home, my uncle looks and says to me, you know a lot of people got together and wanted an apartment and say Kol Nidrei, I turned around and say to my uncle, you want to say Kol Nidrei, so I turned around, for what, to pray to God for what for just burying my mother, nobody was there, then I was thinking for a moment, maybe she wants me to, maybe its a good time, maybe now be an occasion to say Kaddish, which I did. When a week passed by and we didn't have no transportation to our home town, because between the cities, we couldn't travel we had to wait, finally we had to walk 50 kilometers. But we find that 50 km was a little too hard. We decided that we're going to run soon. We run down to the depot, and go home and meet my sister. She was very angry because it we didn't let him know before what happened.
Only before we had to sit Shiva in the city of Lodz. My father was very mad, he couldn't you know all the little things that happen in my family, my brother was sittng Shiva, meeting twice a day, neighbors were saving neighbors, the Germans had already occupied the city of Piertgov, of course. (15:00) It was very hard to go out, my father, the first day, when we came home, when we came home, after the Shiva, he went down to the brewery, and he saw the Germans had occupied the brewery, for the beer was being made for them. He never again went out of the house, he was so afraid, here was the giant man, a sixfooter, a man who afraid to look at him, he was a very strong man by nature,. all of a sudden became like nothing sitting all day long, praying to God, Oh God come and help, and he didn't want to get out of the house.
What had you heard about the Germans by that point?
They heard, I had some uncles, but they came from Germany in 1934 they were deported from Germany, and I asked them some questions, my uncle, as a German Jew, he did not believe it himself that the Germans were capable of doing this you know, he wasn't of the Nuremburg Laws, but always I used to tell him, Uncle, I heard the Germans did this, and are going to do this to the Jews, he said "(German words) It's not so bad. Don't worry about it" I looked at him, I said, He was a German born Jew, I said, are you drunk you
don't believe it?
This was the attitude of the German born Jews. I had another uncle the same way. They just did not believe it, As a matter of fact, in the city of Lodz, right away the situation changed in Poland go badly that the Poles of German descent, the Common Volksdeutch, they were like, for example, they didn't have no bread, it was very hard to get bread, people had to stand in line, and they were going around the line, you were in the line at 4 o'clock in the morning, standing in line, and when finally you get into the door of the bakery, you had a loaf of bread, you walk out, you walked the street, and took your bread, you are Jew, took away his bread, he was standing there hours to get a piece a loaf of bread, that they took away from you. And the Polish people, as such, were not of great help to us, You can't condemn a nation, but what I have seen, what I've been through, and in my opinion, if not the nations of the world, like the Polish, the Ukrainians, and some Lithuanians they wouldn't give a hand as much for the Germans. Hitler probably could not have accomplished the things which he accomplished, because what I have seen in my personal opinion, I will tell you, mostly the people who did do the crimes, committed the crimes, like in my city, I have seen a lot of Ukrainian sold, and a lot of Ukrainian soldiers. the orders were given by Germans probably, and they did do it.
And finally my father decided he wasn't going to go out of the house, and we lived in a section of town, it was a very nice section, I'm not saying we came from a wealthy family, we came from a middle class family, which in Poland was a rich Jew, and everyone suffered very hard because we actually didn't have no rights to anything. we were merchants, we tried to make a living, so one made a little better living, another made a little worse living.
everybody made a living better or worse, my family made a living, I'm not saying we were wealthy, we lived in a nice section of town, and one morning, a german knocked on the door, and the Germ walked in there, and gave us 24 hours, and when we walked into the apartment, we lived in an apartment, they walked in the apartment, they didn't ask us if we were Jews, they didn't recognize, my father was, you know, didn't wear the collars with the round heads, he was a modern man, so they gave us 24 hours to move out of the house. The story comes here. In the same house where we lived, we lived on the second floor, and on the first floor there lived a mayor of the city. The city of Piertgov was a socialist city, it was very selfom, and in the whole city hall was socialist, and this mayor of the city, he met me on the steps going up, he was a teacher before when I was going to school, he was my teacher. By the way, when I was going to school in Poland, I had to sit in a separate chair, on a separate bench with two other Jewish children.
In the morning when they say their prayers, they told me to get out of the room. When I was a youngster, I remember, of 3 years of age, 4 years of age, I was playing with the children on the street. The children they used to yell, "Hey you Jews, you killed Jesus Christ." As I child, I didn't know, I went to my father. "They say I killed somebody, what are they talking about? (20:00) and they were born with this hatred against myself, against the Jewish people, and the hatred was so great, that in the time the Jew section of time, they would close the doors, they were afraid to walk on the street, the Jews. They preached to them that the Jews killed Christ. it was a very hard life for the Jewish people, even before Hitler came to power. Then AntiSemitism was
very great.
What about the mayor?
Yes, so let's go back to my father when we were forced to move out of the house, so finally we moved out of the house, and we had to find another place, so my father went to the Jewish Gemeinde, the Gemeinde of Jewish people, you know, Gemeinde, it was like a confederation of Jews, and when they give us an apartment in the Jewish section of town, we moved to the Jewish section of town, alright. We lived there for a while, in the Jewish section life was very hard, they gave us two rooms, we used to get rations from the
Jewish federation.
How large was your family then?
Then, my mother was dead already. I had one brother and a sister.
My brother, after my mother died, he could not stand the oppression, a lot of people in those days used to run away to Russia. He got together with a few friends, and then one morning, we got up in the morning, and he disappeared, and I'm still today, I'm thinking my brother is alive, because being in Jerusalem. I look for him and I thought I'd find him. There was living my mother, no my sister, my father, ant myself. My father was afraid to go out of the house, no two ways about it. Only thing he was doing was sitting and praying saying the psalms of David, day and night. He was saying "God will help," which I personally think was very wrong, the closest of the family was family tightness was so great that some of the Jewish boys will probably go out into the forest and fight, but the parents in a way hold them back, because the attitude was, for example, that they throw us from the house, my father used to say, I used to say "Dad, what's going to happen?" "So what's the big difference where we live. So the Germans came, and they need x amount of luggage to give to the Germans, go, what can we do, let's pay him. They told us to give up the radios, but we're not going to listen to the radios. Everything that they did to us was acceptable to certain segments of people, what the whole generation, some of them did play with it, and some did not. They left the families behind, and some of them went into hiding in the ghettos, and then you have an element of people, our own people, who became policemen in the ghettos, who became, worked like, supposedly kept order in the ghettos, I have nothing against those people, because someone had to keep law and order, some of them were good ones, some of them were bad ones, some of them had something better than the next one, and some felt they had a hat that they were better than the others and some of them felt they just had to survive, so this was 1940, I remember, 1940, living night and day, one night somebody knocked on the door, Aufnocken, the same knock on the door scared my sister, and myself too. It was the middle of the night.
The sound of the boot walking the hall and the knock on the door was so scary was so frightening it's unbelievable to describe, the fright that we had. Opened the door, and the German Volkstoi was standing in the door, a Volssteutch, he looks at me and says "What you remember me? No. I'm Karl Brumer" Karl Brumer? Oh yeah, the boy I go to school with, he was a German Volkgtoi. He tells me, listen let me tell you something. A couple of days from now, the Germans are going to take about 1500 to 2000 Jewish boys from this town and send them to Lublin. I just came here to warn you. You are a friend of mine, so get the hell out of here. Don't worry about your father and sister. I will try to help them. He looked around back and forth and walked out. Meanwhile, before this happened, this mayor of the city, our neighbor, who lived downstairs, he met me on the steps and he says "If you want an Aryan paper, you come up to the city hall, and I will see that I get you one, if you want one for yourself, or for your mother,father, or for your sister, I will get you some Aryan papers. The moment when he told me that, it didn't occur (25:00) to me that everyone knows me, how can I have some different papers and live in the city. When this happened, I said to myself, Oh, now is the time I need to do something sure enough it was already a ghetto, we could still go out because Piertgov supposedly was one of the first ghettoes, they gave us the white armbands we have to wear. I took off the armband and I went to the city hall, and matter of fact he told me I had to give him a photograph, and I gave him a photograph, and he gave me a passport named Ziegmund Janskofki, a man who was born in the same age as I, and he was dead already. He died, and I had his passport. When I had his paper in my hand, I said to myself, "Now is the time to do something for my father." My father and sister did not want to accept the situation, and he didn't want to go to Russia. They just felt, this is their home, and nothing that bad will happen that people are talking about. Whatever happens will happen. When this roommate came to my house and tells me what's going to happen, I met a couple of my friends, who already also had Aryan papers made and we took off in the direction of Warsaw. We had heard of a Creation of an underground, called Aka, that was already working in Warsaw. We tried to get to Warsaw. On the way to Warsaw, we had to go in a different direction because it was very hard to travel, so we're going to the city of Trops, then to the city of Falanitza, and then we came to WarsawPrague, we tried to make contact with someone in the underground, a person by the name of Charnetski. He said he could help us one way or the other, So alright. We talked to them, a few days later, finally, he said, you have to go, some of you have to go to Misma, to bring some ammunition back to Warsaw, now you can imagine, now he tells me I have to go. I was a coward, afraid even to look a German in the eyes. I took the train, and I went to Misma, and believe me on the way back, I thought I was going to die because every station, the German Volkstoi used to come out to the train and check to see if anyone carries food or other types of articles into Warsaw,you know, for black marketeering. And they weren't so much interested in black marketeering as to grab something for themselves, this was their
main objective.
Finally I went in, and I came back, alright, we spend a lot of time in Warsaw, and then all of a sudden, they created the Warsaw ghetto, and they had signs all over the city for the Gentiles and for the Jews, have to change apartments, and they had little signs all over the city. So the people who used to live in Prague, the Jews had to exchange apartments to live in the outside. Finally, I think it was 1941, the Warsaw ghetto was closed, and I was standing in Prague, I didn't get in through the ghetto, I was on the outside. This Charnetski, my two friends were still living in Prague, gave us orders, and we have to go to a little city called Dubrow. This was not far away form Misma. The reason why they send us over there, when the Russians attacked Poland from one side and the Germans from the other, and the Polish army fled, they buried a lot of ammunition, our job was to find a connection with the farmers, and try to buy and to bring back not to Warsaw, but to Dubonitza. When I arrived in Dubrow, Right away, we tried to find a place to live. In the middle of the night we arrived there, was raining, walking for Warsaw to Dubon, walking in the middle of the night, we just walk. I was supposed to be there as a Gentile, you know, I couldn't, think of myself, first of all, I walk into a little city, about 50 families there, all living around the marketplace, all the merchants, tailors, shoemakers, and what they were doing, they were going out to the farmers for a week, and make repairs, the shoemakers make shoes, the tailors tailor, it was a very quiet little city, they didn't know any wars. (30:00) There was nobody there, there was one Gentile, it was the fireman, there was one policeman, and then there was the watch, you know, the night was watches, one stood outside, in case of fire in the little town. When I arrived in the little town, we asked the farmer who was walking with him in Warsaw, I asked him, where there is a place where we can stay over night. He pointed out. He said here is a restaurant. His name is Yeshkir. You Knock on the door, he will probably let you in. So we knocked on the door, it was raining we were soaking wet, three of us, soaking wet. We knocked on the door, we heard some commotion in there, somebody comes to the door, and asks in Jewish "who is there?" I said, "some people who want to get in." "Who are you ? I said, "We're Jews from Warsaw." Soon as he heard Jews, he hollered back to his wife, "Leia, Jews are here from Warsaw." Open the door, open the door, fast!" Opened the door, we walked in there. There was along room, a long room, and in the back there was a room he was there with the wife and one child. I remember it was Friday, it was Sabbath. She ran out from the back, made a fire in the stove, and the stove had a pipe going from one end all through this room. She told us to take off our clothes, she made this fire, and the pipe, it was red hot to hang up our clothes, we hang up our clothes and went to bed, and he went into his bar and brought in a bottle of vodka and pour some for everyone, and he didn't ask no questions just poured everyone a glass of vodka, and poured it down, and said "you boys go to sleep, we talk tomorrow, this is Jewish house." The next day in the morning it was 11 o'clock, I remember there was a little clock hanging there, I asked Yershnik, what time is it, he said it was eleven. The whole community of Jews, the whole little town, came to see the strangers from Warsaw.
And everybody right away felt like we were somebody else, a town where the people like I said made a hard living, a very hard living, finally right way in the Hasana, they decided, this guy goes to live with you, this one will sleep, will live with this one, and this one will live with this one. They didn't know that we came here for a purpose, we just didn't tell them. I was aassigned to live with a guy named Schlool, may he rest in peace, a tailor, a little short fellow with a little gold beard. He was wearing glasses made from wire, his wife's name, may she rest in peace, was Suro and a little boy named Serlicki. I slept, they made a bed for me on the tailor table to sleep. So the first day he asked me "so did you people in town in Warsaw, it was a ghetto, the people live in a separate place, they did not, they could not believe all that I was telling them, and finally I said "you know what, let's stop talking about it, because this makes them feel not good, listen, they live a quiet life,they still do business every Tuesday and Friday." The farmers used to come to the little town used to come to the market, to sit down and have a little drink, you know, to talk about buying corn and selling corn, buying a horse, selling a horse, knocking their hands back and forth. When it came Saturday, it was the most beautiful scene a man can imagine in his life, the poorest man in the city to the richest one in Vildmere, all were there, the happy Jew, working in the nice black collars with the girdlet on, some with them on their arms, going right to the shoe, pride in their heads, they didn't have, it wasn't hard to make a living, (35:00) they have guards there, every night, one of the neighbors, went to the market to watch that nothing happened. I was a guest in the house, she was doing everything possible that she could, find a potato, a little soup, a little bread to cook, whatever it is. I say Schlool, I'm going to stand for you. going to stay for you, OK, so I was on watch, I was standing there, they give you a big coat. They give you a horn, in case something happened you had to blow your horn. I just prayed to God "I hope nothing happens in this town." So I was standing there, Schwew's wife Schew was pregnant. In those days they didn't have any doctors, the town didn't have any doctors, the only thing was a woman who delivered babies. One day, a few German trucks drove into town and asked the Jewish people to deliver them an x amount of cows, and x amount of this, they needed it for them, and if they didn't get it they would put all the people in the market place and the German soldiers, you could see, were having a ball, they were laughing at the Jews with the lang beards, they used to come out and cut off the beards, and in this moment, Schew's wife, it happened, she miscarries, and who was have to deliver the baby, it was very hard, she was 7 or 6 months, and, they didn't know what to do. I knew a little bit from reading, not too much. I tried to help her. The women of the town came in and said you are a boy you can not stay here. Maybe I can help, do something, whatever, do something. Anyway, a little boy was born, a little child, I remember. I got a bowl full of water and sugar to try to keep him alive, and after a few days this baby died. Schew made a little casket for his young boy, went out to the center.
And I looked at him, in his suit, the casket in his arm, the snow, walking to the cemetery, and myself, I buried my mother, in a not different day, and I started thinking why? Why? if we only knew why maybe we'd be happier to die. Well one day past a few weeks,didn't particularly want to go on what was happening in the little town.
All of a sudden, we got our connections, and we had some ammunition to take back to Dobonitza. Now the same farmer who gave us the ammunition he put it in sacks of corn. He let us have a horse, and told us we had to leave the city this Tuesday because on Wednesday morning he heard from the Polish police in Minsk that they were going to take all the Jews out from Dubrow and take them somewhere to Minsk or somewhere, I don't know where. Me, Salik, and David, we knew what was going to happen but we couldn't tell the people, we told Schew, Schlook, something, they're going to take you out. He said "Oh, go to Misma, the world was not going to stay here." So even if you try to tell something, the people did not believe that things like this might happen. Finally, we took, the farmer brought us his horse, and the instructions, and when we get to Fobonitza, he said "Leave the horse and the sled at this place, in this sack is the ammunition, and in this sack there is a machine gun, a small Polish machine gun. He told us about all of those things. My friend Zegnick was a very brave man, because, remember, he was after he said things were telling were going to happen were not going to happen to him. He was a very brave man. And I had some experience with him, he was a very brave man. By traveling through the forest in the middle of the night, we had to cross a highway, you know the sleds had iron on them, and the highway did not have any snow on it. And when we got across the ditch, the horse could not pull the buggy and the horse. We hollered to go across, it couldn't go across. So we had to get the horse up and get off the highway fast.
So a minute or so, we see far away 2 little stars, like an automobile, a little truck traveling on the Treblina Highway. I said to Saline, let's leave everything and let's run. Not on my life, We don't run, you take the horse and go down the ditch. He took out his knife, cut off the sack where the machine gun was sitting. He set up the machine gun, set up everything, I say you're crazy we're going to die, the Germans! He said "I die with them "(Hebrew words meaning the former) (4O:OO) If we die, we die all together." And he hit me and I went he pushed me away, he said you go away from here. I was laying there waiting and I was, believe in me, I just felt it was the end, this was it. The truck was coming straight to us, he took an end to Warsaw. So Zegnick said, "You see, I told you, don't worry about it." We loaded up everything, and we went into Fobonitza. We came into Faubonitza. we delivered the goods, and I was, there was people there from this group, supposedly. I don't want to go into any particulars of what happened in Warsaw before, you have the picture how it happened. We delivered the ammunition. We went up on, we dried off, and we were sitting there for a couple of hours. I had to go to the restroom, I was human. Went outside in the forest there was another guy by the name of the Yellow, "Drupsit" And he was standing next to me, he looks down at me and says, "I didn't know you, you were a Jew soandso." I said "you're crazy." He said you're circumcised, you are a Jew, you see, in Poland in those days, the only people who were circumcised were the Jews, the other population was not circumcised. And he said to me if Frank finds out you're Jewish he'll probably knock your head off. Me you know me you know I said, I'm a nice guy, he said, you don't have to worry about me, just watch out that Frank doesn't find out that you are a Jew. And I told this to Saline who I talk to every day, and he said "Sam, let's get the hell out of here before something very bad happens." Matter of fact we had to leave because they shot, the night before somebody had shot the chief of police. So we were strangers in town, and the first thing the Germans would do is look for us, so we had to get out. Now it was a question, how to get into the ghetto. To get into the ghetto, I didn't want to stay outside. When we got into the ghetto, Marchinetski said "you better stay here in Prague, don't go into Warsaw yet." Because the war in the ghetto is very bad. So he finds us accommodation, pardon my expression, a bordello, a whorehouse. I find that during my period, before I got into a concentration camp, which I'll tell you later.
In this period, the people, the pimps the prostitutes! the low class, the United States of people, were more helpful to Jews and nonJews than the intelligentsia which the Germans killed than any other segment of the race. This were people you could rely on. It was a big house in Prague, where Jewish families had lived before, and during this time, the Jew family moved into the ghetto, and the Gentiles moved in. This was on this street, and not far away was a railroad station. Farmers used to come from small towns, and this was the first house and they used to brought in eggs, butter bread and sell this to the people. They used to sleep in the doorways until the next morning to go to the trains to go home. Those people live in the apartment house, went in turn and sold on the outside, you know, black marketeering. This whorehouse was on the doorway.
There was this big door, if you ever seen the way European houses are built, you walk in go into the backyard then you go into the apartment. The woman was also the caretaker of this apartment house. Her name was Yehovah, and the house's name was Avochek. The whorehouse, the bordello was cordoned off like this, and we lived upstairs, and the reason why she took them in was this. Three prostitute lived downstairs and they used to service the German soldiers and we lived upstairs. During the day, most of the time we
were not there.
She took us in because her attitude was knowing Charnetski, that he was the Polish underground, and he recommended us. (45:00) He had liberated her. She was an alcoholic, constantly drinking, and always blaming the Jews, if not for the Jews, the Polish people would not suffer as much as you. Here I am with a woman talking about my people and my race and listening to all of those remarks making, my friend Zaynik says, this was going on for weeks, let me knock them off and kill them all and get out of here, how much can you take. He said till we get some more orders, where to go, what to do, let's stay here. I calmed him down. Now you can imagine what's going on in the bordello, the drinking, and we living upstairs, you don't want to make any noise, this, I say young person, they seduce you, and you are afraid to talk to her because you are circumcised, you're a man but you're circumcised, and it was a terrible thing, And this woman was talking what the Jews did to Polish people. They did this, and Hitler didn't worry. I kill them, I'd kill them, she said, A farm girl used to come there every night and she used to carry eggs with her, you know from the farm.
She had a man who used to buy from her, he was a steady customer, he used to buy all of her eggs. One night he goes out to her and says "You brought some eggs." "I don't want to sell you any eggs because I've got my customer." Back at the house, Ziegmund, she says to me, "you go out there and see if she's a Jew, I think she's a Jew. Do anything possible to find out if she's a Jew, if she's a jew we're going to kill her, call the Gestapo. By god, those Jews, causing and causing trouble. Speaking to her In Polish, I say "What do you want from her? She's a farm girl, next time she comes to town she will sell you eggs. No, you SOB to me, you better go out, drunk like hell, bottle in her hand, hollering. So Ziegnick says to me, you better go, so we don't make too much noise. I walked out there. How do we approach, we had a password in the ghettoes, and outside, if you wanted to recognize a Jew or if he's actually a Jew, the password was "Amhew", "Amhew." Try this Amhew. This was the title of my book, "Amhew." Considering this was a nice blond girl, dressed as a farm girl, of course, sitting in the corner Sam, what does "Amhew" mean? "Amhew" means "one of us." "Amhew" means "one of us." So the girl was sitting there and I said to myself how can I approach her, you know, find out from her. I was sitting next to her, I ask her what is your name? where do you come from? What you do ? Ask her all kinds of questions. Then I threw in the word "Amhew" and when I threw in the word Amhew, she said "Yo." Right away, I said to her, listen, don't ever come back here again, she has an eye on you, don't you ever come back here, fine, she said thank you. Before, and I made her lay down. It was something.
Yehovah, she opens up the door and looked out, she sees that I am laying on the floor with her. She didn't. I came back, and I said, Yehovah, what are you doing, she's a farm girl, she was saying the patches and begging, what are you talking about, she's from Gere, a little town, just forget about it, just leave her alone. Are you sure. Yes, I'm sure. When we were upstairs, my friends asked me about it. He just took out his gun and said let me kill them all up. No, just tomorrow morning, let's get out of here and go into the ghetto. Next morning we walked out and tried to get into he
ghetto.
How do you get into the ghetto? They had commandoes of people going out of the ghetto to work outside, and in the evening, they bring them back in again. I saw people walking. Zeegnick and David find a commando and got in with. I had to find another commando of people to get in, so I was at the iron gate (50:00) where the commando walked in and I was there, and outside they had German soldiers and Polish police, and inside you had Jewish police. So I came in and he said, where are you going (Hebrew for the latter) I said, I'm a Jew. The Jewish policemen inside when he heard what I said, I'm a Jew, started talking, hollering at me in Jewish, loif, run. So I ran into the ghetto, running and the guy was running after me with a stick hollering run, run, you know run. And finally after a few streets, I don't remember exactly which streets. I looked down, people laying on the streets, covered with newspapers, lift up my hands to God, if I should die, let me die with my people. I spend there for a while in the Warsaw ghetto. How long
were you there?
It was about two weeks. I couldn't take it any longer. I have to.I calmed don my bodies, and we jumped the fence, they had fences around the Warsaw ghetto with glass on top so the only way to jump it was to get into a house where the window was close to the fence, which we did in Patrigas. and early int he morning wee jumped, and when we were jumping, there were Pollacks out there yelling, Jews run out from the ghetto, and we were running, and they were running after us, because they got paid, for whatever they paid them, to watch after us, to buy clothes. In the house, when in the cellar, and we spend there for a few hours, then a German soldier didn't give up, what do they call him, the Schutzpolice, a Shutz policemen, came down he was looking for us, and Zegnick didn't have no choice, and we stabbed him and killed him in the cellar and we got out very quietly on the streets of Warsaw, and people, were walking and we were afraid someone would be looking for us. And I say to Zegnick and David, I have to leave you boys, I have to go home to Petroikhov and see what my father and sister are doing. I said goodbye to Zegnick and David and went to the railroad train, the railroad to go home to. When I got to the railroad train, I find out that there were a lot of volunteers, Polish volunteers to go and work in Germany. They used to capture a lot of young people too for to go and work on the farms in Germany. And I got to the station, Schutzpolice inside, came, and when I saw him coming to me, I said O my god, this is it who knows He asked me for the papers, I show him the papers. Where are you going? To Petrov. I am registered with my brother to go to Germany to work. He said, are you such a good boy to let me out and I got on the train and finally I arrived in the city of Petroikhov. When I came to Petroikhov, I had a hard time to get into the ghetto, I had to get into the ghetto, to find my parents, I didn't know where my father and sister lived. Outside the city I was afraid to walk around too much because most of the people in the city knew me, who I am, so I was afraid. I had the same experience in Warsaw as I had in Petroikhov. I got into the ghetto, and I went to the apartment where my father and sister used to live.
They had to move somewhere else. So finally asking around, and there were so many strangers in Petroikhov, there were so many people, from towns where they were liquidated, they were brought into the Petroikhov ghetto. So finally someone told me where my father lived, and I found my father and sister living in one room, and in the next room another family was living. I came home. My father was very happy to see me, when I went down to the ghetto, I could not believe my eyes, I had my gun with me and my papers with
me What was going on there?
They were capturing people sending, asking everyday for more money from the Jewish commando, (55:00) and when the money was not delivered, they use to take hostages, 10,12,15. They used hang them. There was a market, every day someone go to the forest somebody who was arrested was shot. The Jewish people were afraid to go out. The Jewish commando Did you see some of the hangings?
I have seen some of the hangings in the market. I have seen some, my experience. I was called to dig a grave for a , for I have seen, I was there, I saw with my own eyes, and then from jail, in the morning, they used to send them out to the forest, you knew somebody else was going to be shot. I want to bring up the point.
In the evening I came home, I was standing in the night. I wanted to take out, I always clean my gun. I was always afraid if I had to use it, it would get stuck. When my father saw this, the first thing he said, he said get out of my house. You're going to bring disaster to the whole ghetto. If they catch this gun in this house.
All the Jews going to die, Dad, Abba, they're all going to die anyway, just please, let's have something. No get out of this house or throw away this gun. I went out, I didn't want to make any scenes, I was happy to see him. I came home, I went down, and I buried the gun in the backyard with mine papers that I had, I came in, and he said what did you do with the gun, I said I throw them in the latrine. The thinking was just impossible to me to hand. I said to myself, Why? Why are you afraid of? You're going to die anyway. Look what they've done to you. Take away your radio, make you move three times, and the funny thing is you don't' have any wood to burn in the house. We used to What finally happened in the ghetto?
They liquidated the ghetto.
Were you there when they liquidated the ghetto?
I was there when they liquidated the ghetto.
What happened at that point of liquidation?
When they 1 liquidated the big ghetto, there were two ghettoes . At that time, how the Jews street by street, Ukrainian soldiers used
to come in.
Taking them where?
All used to get together. The city of Petroikhov was a marketplace, a square. Now this square, They used, whatever they did with them, I was not there, I had a working permit, In the city of P, they organized 3 places for Jew people to work, glass factory, 2 glass fact, 1 furniture factory, and the people tried to organize so lots of people were going to these places to work, and the rest went off, matter of fact, to Treblinka.
What happened at that point of liquidation? They were taking them out street by street.
Yeah, they were taking them out, 2,3 streets at a time. Everybody couldn't go out on the streets.
What happened to you at that point?
At that point, I had a work permit. And the German and Jewish police came to this house and tell everybody down in the yard, so everybody went down to the yard. Of course, I had a work permit, and an Ukrainian soldier was standing around, so I asked. We have to take out the luggage and so. Everyone who has a work permit has to go to this side, and everyone who doesn't have a work permit has to go to this side.My father went over to this German, Ukrainian soldier, let me talk to my son for a minute. He say to me, you know, I know what's going to happen, I can feel it in my bones.
Maybe in the years past, (1:00:00) I tried to be harsh with you, now I want you to do something for me, please, do me one favor before I go, don't be an actor, it is a disgrace, Secondly, you have to give me a handshake, at which I shook hands, then he says to me Now, I'm not asking you for, I'm just begging of you, pick a day of the year, light a candle and say Kaddish for me. Those were the last words I had from my father, Then they took me out to this Kada. I was assigned to the Kada.
We're going to take a break to change the tape. Do you want to take
a drink?
(Skip from 4:01 to 4:04)
Alright, Sam.
After the small ghetto, I was taken back to the working camp called Dublini there were shoemakers, tailors, cabinetmakers, they were going to liquidate us, supposedly to take us to another camp.
(1:05:00) I didn't know where we were going. Took us with our stuff, they took us to the trains, put us on trains, I saw where we came into Birkenau, the people took us off from the train. One of the people says to us, "you are very lucky, Mengele is not here today." Who was Mengele? You all are very lucky, all go to the Klausen.since we came from our working camp Augbylager, they fed you a little better than the rest of the camp because you did some work for them. And going to the Klauses, they cut off our hair, they deloused us, they put us in showers, and we still didn't flames coming out from chimneys, the guys who were shaving our heads said, you come here, you never get out of here. Talking this kind of stuff. We say they're crazy. Finally, after giving us showers, they give us some clothes, they put me, I went into quarantine. Quarantine was a segment of the Birkenau camp. They tried to tatoo numbers on every bodies hands. I tried to run away.
I got acquainted with a Kapo there, a Pollack, if you don't have a number and you want to work, you're going to go over there. He pointed to the chimney. So the guy is crazy. People are burned here alive, I said, I never heard of it. One day, he was standing there in line on the Perplatz and some German officers came across, and talked to people who came from twins, who had an Aryan father, and right away came to my mind something, here is a chance, I tell them my father was Aryan, my mother was something else, and I would get out of it. I tried to step out from the line, this Kapo, this Blockaltester, when I stepped out of line, he pushed me back in the line. He pushed me back in the line, I didn't know why, I was just trying to get out. After they left, a few boys got out of the line and they took them away somewhere, he called me into the block, and he called me into the block and called me names, you SOB, stupid idiot you know if you tell them you have an Aryan mother or an Aryan father they'll take you to Auschwitz to experiment. I said experiment, what kind of experiment? You said, you don't know what's going on, you idiot you don't know what's going on. You better try to get a number, because you have to get attached to this and this block, so you better stay in line to get a number. I got in, they tattooed my number, after quarantine for two days, there was selection day, and I still didn't know what selection means. They closed all of the blocks, no one could go out. Then they walked in and took out some people, you didn't know where they were going. So this was selection, I didn't know. The next day, two days later they took me to Lager C, the working block. I was assigned to Block 24, When I came to block 24 the block was split in the middle with a long oven. One half was newcomers, on the other half, I saw people with striped suits, which we didn't have.
I didn't have, we had civilian suits with stripes painted all over, and I didn't know what was going on. Those boys were eating so good, they had salamis, they had cheese. I was hungry, asked a guy for some bread, he gave me some bread.
I asked where are these boys getting this type of food? I went to work in the Vaila commando. It was very, very hard work, I came home dead. When I came home to the barracks at nighttime, I was feeling, the first thing I did to get this soup, a little bit, and lay down on the bed, and try to forget about it.
Had you yet seen Mengele?
No. I had not seen Mengele yet. And when I was laying there, I got acquainted with a boy who worked, who lived on the other side of the barracks, and I said what type of commando are you working
with?
Transport Commando, The Canada. What is this Canada? He said when people come in (4:10:00) we take people off from the train. He says you know the Kapo of this commando, he was from Lodz, and I knew him from before. He was sent to Auschwitz, Birkenau. He did something wrong in the ghetto, he came in 1942 and they made him Kapo. This boy says to me, his name was Schlom, why don't you talk to David? Maybe we're going to need someone in the Commando. So I went. He says what happened. Oh they took out a couple of guys today. They took them somewhere else. Not knowing anything going on whatsoever. I said, David, you know me from Lodz, I am soandso, and he said you SOB, he hit me with a stick like this, knocked me over the head and pushed me away, I want to work in this commando, I see your guys have so much to eat, so much to drink, why don't you take me into this commando? He said go to hell and things like that. So this Schlomel came over and talked to him and he said listen, we have an opening, you know him from Lodz, take him into the commando, why not, let him get in, this and that. Fine, Kapo came over, you come over to this side and work in this commando. He went out, this was daytime, he came back, OK, you want to work in this commando? I took out your card in the Schleitzpol, the place where they keep the archives, he took out my number with my name and put it in, and said now, you will not get out of here alive.
You want to work in Transport commando, this is it. You asked for it, you'll find out, you will never get out of here alive.
So he really had tried to protect you at first?
So he had really tried to protect me at first. A few day in there, all of sudden, one morning, there were 2 shifts, I will try to explain it to you, there were 2 shifts of people, a nighttime and a daytime, they called it Canada, why it was called Canada, I find out later they was an abundance of food they had enough to eat.
They called this group Canada. The next day in the morning a transport came in. A transport came in. Schlomel says to me, the boy I worked with says to me, we used to wear the striped suits, especially made, nice clean looking everybody, just like that. He says to me, "Don't talk to nobody, even if you see a face you know, don't say anything, they may ask you questions, just play deaf and
dumb." So this transport was new people coming in?
New people coming in from somewhere else. A transport of people coming in. A transport from, the first transport I worked was from Czechoslovakia transport or from Hungary, I don't know which transport it was, because I try to erase this particular segment, I can't get it out of my system. So I went to work, and they told me, they were all standing, two people to open up the doors of the car, they told me not to stand up until orders came, little farther down there was a ramp with several Germans standing there, and a officer standing there like this (hand in shirt like Napoleon) and I said to Schlomel, who is that? This is Dr. Mengele, what is he doing, don't ask, you'll find out, this is a selection, don't ask, don't talk to me.
Orders came from the German guards, and said "(German word) Open the gates" We opened up the gates, my god, I see women, children, men. We help them to get out, a woman asked a German officer there, I want to take my luggage with me. He said you don't have to worry, your package will come after you. Crematorium, I was not far away, you could see it not far away from the ramp, Crematorium I, it was a beautiful building with manicured grass outside, you could think it was a house there, some kind of beautiful house. The people were standing in line in front of Mengele and I have seen people he pointed with his finger this way and that way and that way, and I used to watch him, and Schlomel say to me, "Hurry up, come on, go in the car, you know to clean the cars and this, to take out the luggage of the people, to set it up." All of sudden, you see a part of the people going to the direction of the camp, and another going to the Crematorium, A few minutes later you're going to see fire come up. I did not believe it. Being on the ramp, working in Auschwitz, I did not believe it. The next day, I came home, we used to have a lottery, we used to go through the luggage to find food, to exchange (4:15:00) for vodka. The boys were always drinking, and I couldn't understand why they were drinking so much alcohol. They tried to be . Living, they had everything there, you wanted vodka, you wanted salami, you want bread, you want cheese, whatever you wanted, you had it. There was nothing they didn't have. How did you find out what you heard on the ramp was true? Find out what your friend had told you about the crematorium? Later. I found out, one day, it was not a transport coming in, and they took us in to sort the clothes, in a special camp, we used to go in there, where I found thousand and thousands of stacks of clothing, men's clothing, shoes, you know, children's shoes, and then I realized the situation, what was going on here.
And then did you connect it with the drinking too?
I connected right away with the drinking why those boys doing that much what was going on in there. Actually, when I was sitting one day, I could not take it after working so many transports. I was sitting there in the barracks and I turned to my trade, and I said "tell me, when we go the Yom Kippur, when we go to the shove, all the talk about forgiveness, the day of atonement, you tell who should die by fire, who should die by water, who should live, who should die, did all of those people commit one crime that they had to be burned?" I was sitting there, saying, pick up our glass of wine. Every generation someone comes along and tries to destroy us, and you almighty god, can save us. Am I one to be saved, and I more worthy than my parents, and thousands of other people? Why? Why did you put me in this situation? Morning, you used to go out of the barracks and see a lot of bodies hanging on the side. My mind came through to commit suicide, to go to the wire. I just couldn't understand and it didn't work for me. I tried, at night I used to count the steps, how many steps out to the wire and touch my hand. I walk out there one night and I tried to go out there. I counted out the ten steps and stretched out my hands and didn't
find the wires.
And in this minute, I was afraid to die, I ran back to the barracks, I was afraid to die, they were going to shoot me. After this happened, I had a desire to live, my desire to live was so strong I tried to do everything possible to go through this to be able to tell the world actually what these people were doing.
What were you seeing every day?
I have seen every day people going to the Crematorium. People were seeing. I have seen the little guy who went up to the window and throw in the cyanide, open up the door and throw it in. Thousands and thousands of people going to the crematoriums. I took people off from the trains and I saw them walking to the Crematorium.
Sam, you're one of the few survivors of this kind of job, this task? How did that come to pass?
It is very hard to deal with. It's very hard on myself to think about it. If I had known you see the survival from a human being, I thought those guys on the other side, they had so much food, if I work with them, I might have a lot of food, maybe I'll survive.
Actually, I got to see things what they did have actually happened, I have seen with my own eyes, I have seen the man throw in the gas, I have seen the people in the Crematoriums, I have seen the way Mengele was directing, sending people to the right side. Even in the family, when he had to go to the gas chambers, he didn't mind, he had to go to this side. He took a young person who wants to go to the camp, When it was the opposite, he did not allow. He always used to, he sent everybody, it was like a stage play, we were the stage hands (4:20:00), cleaning, preparing, and he was the actor, the mean exacter, and the people who used to come in were like the actors, they did not know what's going on, how the show was going to end. Those people did not know. After several transports, I knew exactly how it was going to end. Those people who arrived did not know. Several transports, when they burned the 30,00, 40,000 gypsies from the gypsies camp, when I saw the ovens burning day and night, I could not believe. I could not believe the situation, a human being could do that to a human being.
When did you realize that you too would be liquidated?
I knew, I didn't, I realized because the Kapo told me I would never get out of there. What happened actually with us, I would ask later when they start to destroy the crematoria in 1944. Already transports started coming in. So the Sonderrcommando, the people who burn the bodies, they never came out alive, they burned them, they changed them all the time. We didn't know what was going to happen to us, when they were going to burn us. When they demolished the crematoria, one crematorium was left, I don't remember exactly.
We thought this is waiting for us, we're going to be finished because we were witnesses to the history, we saw it, we were the ones who sorted the clothes, we were the ones who sorted the selections, we saw the man who put in the case in the window up there, we saw Mengele day after day what he did. One day, I don't know what happen, my Kapo, was a German Jew his name was Fritz, he walked into the camp and said, anybody who had hidden something could throw it in this hat. So I didn't know what happened, when you worked with the clothing, you used to find diamonds, gold, a little bit, you used to bring it back in a box and exchange for salami with prisoners or German guards, whatever might be the case, he ran out and then back again. Then they said "everybody out from the barracks." We were in a special barracks, with wire all around, no one could come in or get out. So when we were out, somebody said "Achtung" everybody should stay, remain standing, a group of two hundred. There was also a Scheitzcommando there, so we were all standing there, we tried to walk out from camp to the right side of us, going from the camp to the Lagerstat goes to the train, when he said left side you knew you were going to the crematorium, there were no two ways about it, finally, when we came to the door he said Canada Commando, he saluted, told us where we were going, you know, the Commando goes out. So we walk out, he said "Rechtsum" right, when he said right, we started running, not walking, we ran, actually ran, when we asked where we were running, when we came to the ramp, there were five or six cars standing there, the cars were open, we jumped into the cars, all of us, and when we came in the cars, there was bread there, you know, with cans of water, maybe ten minutes the cars, they closed the doors, the guards sitting on top, the trains started moving. We didn't know exactly where we were going, we just looked out and said, and all of a sudden, they probably changed the railroad so the turn went back and then back, you know how it is, so we started thinking, they are cheating us, supposedly they are taking us out, now they are going to take us back. Finally the trains start moving, you can not imagine, you can not have this feeling at this moment what we had what we felt getting out of Birkenau, because this transport which came before, which had spent a few days in Birkenau, they took them out to an Arbeitz camp, they did not know, they had not seen actually what had happened, they just knew they were not in Birkenau. Here, you have a group of people, who were actually seeing the situation what happened, when you can get out from a place like this, my god, we didn't care about anyone, we were jumping for joy in the cars. When we got there, they took us in to Sudetenburgland, to Czechoslovakia, to a camp, and I was working, they were building then the V2 rockets, we were supposed to build those big holes and set up the rockets. I spend there a little while, there was a camp in the mountains, they called it Soeswild Camp, I was there for a while, and after that, they took us out from there, the Russian army was closing in on Czechoslovakia, they took us out from this camp and we were going on a march, they called it a death march.
(4:25:00) Finally they found the trains, and from this train, they took us in the concentration camp Flossenburg. Flosssenburg was a concentration camp, but it was run by ninety percent homosexuals.
If you know how a concentration camp worked, you see, every prisoner had a triangle, you had a red triangle, you were a political prisoner, you had a black triangle, you were a criminal, you had a blue triangle, you were a homosexual.
Like Buchenwald, for example, a concentration camp, I was not there, was run by political prisoners because the Germans set it up so the prisoners themselves run the camps. Flossenburg was run by homosexuals, and some of the young boys had a very hard time there.
Mr. Goldberg, how after in these camps, how did it come about that you yourself were liberated eventually?
I was liberated on the way to be executed. I was at a concentration camp called Murdov, on the 9th of April. They took us out from Murdov, and said all the Jews "Auftreten" all the Jews, they were a lot of Ukrainians, Russian soldiers, POWs, Pollacks, They were standing in line and the Russian used to push us out, you're a Jew, they took us in a train. They, take us, some guards. We were going on transport, where were we going,we didn't know. On the way, it was a few days we were traveling, finally, supposedly, they tell us that we are free we could go, so we went out, we were captured back by the soldiers and they tried to shoot us and to kill us because we were liberated so a lot of us ran away. So the front line was there and a lot of our people were captured by the front line soldiers and were shot on the street. Finally, they brought us all back and the guards who had captured us in the small town there told us, We said transport fear, he told us we were free people, so we went, we didn't do any harm. He said, don't worry about it, you're going to be free, free in Tirol, you're going to be free in Tirol. You're going to be free in Tirol. I didn't understand what he was talking about Tirol. When I came back to the car, Finally, I jumped in the car, because standing with the machine guns were trying to kill us, and my friend told me to run zigzag and somebody grabbed me by the hand on the top of all the other people in the car. So we got into the car, the mine came to Tirol. It was standing on the ramp, going back and forth a few days, exhausted, already, have that, and we didn't know what was what, I was hallucinating, I didn't know anything. I had a pair of wooden shoes, holding under my head. One day, two airplanes, fighter planes, came across shooting on the train. Their aim, probably, which I found out later was to shut down the locomotives so they could not go any further because it was one line. Then by nine o'clock in the morning I was already half gone. I was vomiting, just half gone. So we were sitting there in the train, finally we heard noises, an American, some tanks came along, someone said, some French looking soldiers are here to liberate us. I didn't know that. They opened the doors, I was hallucinating, someone pushed, pulled, me out of the car like this and I was thinking in my mind, they are pulling me out to be shot in Tirol because I was already gone. So I picked up a shoe and hit him like this. I thought just last minute let me hit somebody. So the person who picked me up, said in broken German, crying, he said to me "I didn't come to kill you. I came to liberate you. I'm an American." They took me right away to a field hospital.
You mentioned to me luck?
Plain luck. Nothing else. Everybody who survived in the ghettoes and in the concentration camp, every one person, it was not smartness, it was nothing, it was just plain luck. The number of this person come out. It was nothing else but luck. Every survivor was a miracle of survival, survived by luck. Because on the day we were liberated, nine o'clock in the morning when the third army the tenth division, a tank division when they came to liberate us, the people, (4:30:00) I will say six or seven hundred people died two to three hours after the liberation because they started eating.
This was luck too. I came across, an American nurse, gave me glucose in my arms to make me stronger, 78 pounds on the scale, lies that big in my body. They washed me, they cleaned me, and this lady says to me, "one thing you should know, you're a very strong boy, but you're very weak, so don't eat, don't you eat, get some milk, a little rice, go to an american kitchen, don't eat food, if you're going to eat, you're going to die. A lot of them were not lucky, somebody told me what to do. I was lucky enough for her told me. After a few days, I came back to my strength. And I, thank god I'm here. I just want to tell you that people shouldn't happen again to nobody. People out there should watch out. Things like this should never, never happen again and it's up to the people to do that. Let me read you something to you which I picked out a few weeks ago in a little article which is very important, I want to mention about it. The record of a pastor Martin E. Miller, the German theologian, desperate and modern, first he said "The Nazis went after the Jews," and I quote, "but I was not a Jew, so I did not object. Then they went after the Catholics, but I was not a Catholic, so I did not object. Then they went after the trade unionists, but I was not a trade unionist so I did not object. Then they came after me, but there was none, no one, to object." This
everybody should remember.
Great.
OK .
That's it.
Thanks, Sam, right on the button.
. END.
