United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Harry Iticovici
August 24, 2010
RG-50.030*0583 PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a recorded interview with Harry Iticovici, conducted on August 24, 2010 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
HARRY ITICOVICI
August 24, 2010
Question: Good morning Harry. It’s nice to have you here. Tell me what your name was at your birth.
Answer: Harry Iticovici.
Q: Iticovici, or iti –
A: No, let me tell you about this.
Q: Yes.
A: My father names was Ithzeekovitch(ph). Ithzeekovitch(ph). The letter in Romanian, a T with a little comma under it, a C. And when they asked me my name, I forgot about the little comma, so that’s why I said Iticovicz(ph). But it was Ithzeekovitch(ph).
Q: Ithzeekovitch(ph).
A: See, Ithzik(ph), it’s a Jewish name from Isaac. And there are people in Israel now by the name – with the name of Ithzik(ph), Ithzik(ph).
Q: Now di – did you, many years later, did you take your father’s first name as your middle name?
A: Yeah, yeah, exactly. When I became a citizen here, when I naturalized here, I took my father’s middle name because I had no middle name and everybody was asking me about the middle name.
Q: I see. So you thought you should have one?
A: Yeah.
Q: And how do you pronounce your father’s first name, is it Newman(ph)?
A: Neuman, n-e-u-m-a-n.
Q: I see. And when were you born?
A: I was born in June 2nd, 1922.
Q: Tell me a little bit about your family, and – you had a – a y – an older brother, or a younger brother?
A: Younger brother.
Q: A younger brother. And what – what did your father do?
A: He was a businessman, I mean he – a merchant, you know. That’s what he was doing.
Q: And what – what was he a merchant of? Was it shoes?
A: Shoes and originally was leather, from what I understand, but then it was shoes.
Q: And your mother, did she work?
A: No.
Q: No.
A: Now, I was told that when the communists came in Romania, she worked as a custodian in the school or something. But not when – when I was a child there in Romania. She was just a housewife, you know.
Q: How do you remember your family life, when you were growing up?
A: Well, we were privileged, I think. I was privileged in many ways because the time of the Romania was, after first World War, and the economic situation was good, and my father business was good, so I didn’t have to work. So th-the only thing I had to do is to go to school.
Q: And what sort of a – did you live in an apartment, did you live in a house?
A: No, we only lived in an apartment.
Q: Uh-huh. A-An apartment that your parents owned, or that they just rented?
A: No, rented.
Q: Was it a big one? Did you have your own room, for instance?
A: When I was an adolescent, yes. That’s another one, we had the – I had the – my own room where I could study, you see. There was a lot of studying in the high school in Romania that time. And of course we had to learn lots of foreign languages. We learned French in school, then the Italian in school, and then privately I learned English.
Q: And why did you privately learn English? Why was – did your parents think this was an important thing to do?
A: Well, because if – the idea was – part of it was that when you – in Romania, if you leave there, and you are a s-specialist, either you are an engineer or an architect, or a doctor, you have to travel. So if you have to travel, you have to know languages.
Q: So did you become fluent in French and Italian –
A: Now –
Q: Yeah?
A: In French I had to become fluent, because there was an exam in French. You see, th – we have the – they had the high school in Romania is like in France, you have to pass the baccalaureate, you know. And there is an exam in French, and the French teacher is talking you in French. But th-the – talks about literature, and what else? And so I – I took some lesson in conversation in French.
Q: And what about your Italian, was there an exam in Italian?
A: Italian, no, no, there was no examination in Italian, you know, just is a – I didn’t want to take German. Most students took Germans, but I – I didn’t like the German.
Q: And how come?
A: Because of Hitler.
Q: I see, so you were very conscious –
A: Oh yes.
Q: – once you became a – a –
A: Oh yeah, we were very conscious when I was in high school. Let me say this about this. In Romania, there were at least two political party that was very – that were very anti-Semitic. And when you were growing up in high school, and reading the newspaper, you were aware that there was a certain amount of anti-Semitism all the time.
Q: Mm-hm. Wer – did you have non-Jewish friends as well as Jewish friends in – in high school, or was this mainly a Jewish school?
A: No, I went to high school, a state high school, which was in – more or less in the Jewish district of town. And ma – ther – about half of the class was Jewish, half of the class was not Jewish. But we had Jewish friends. I had Jewish friends.
Q: You had Jewish friends, as well as –
A: Not –
Q: – not Jew – non-Jewish friends.
A: Well, we had one guy that we played soccer with, that was not Jewish, maybe.
Q: But mostly you had Jewish friends.
A: Jewish friends, right.
Q: Were – were your parents religious? Was your home a religious home?
A: No.
Q: It wasn’t.
A: They were not religious. Except that my father used to go to the synagogue primarily for what they used to call yutzat(ph) you know, for –
Q: Mm-hm, memorial.
A: – for memorial things, yeah, for his mother and father or something. He used to go to a small synagogue, which he didn’t go to the high –
Q: To [indecipherable]
A: – high holidays, no, no.
Q: So you didn’t go to synagogue growing up?
A: I had a Bar Mitzvah.
Q: You did? Did that seem odd to you, given that your parents were not very religious, or did that seem –
A: Well, let me say this about it. According to the Romanian constitution, in high school – you see, the high school was not like here, everybody goes to the high school. You had to take an exam to get in the high school, it wasn’t compulsory high school. And according to the constitution, every student had to have religious education. There was a mark for religious education, you had to be in the class. And I took Jewish religion in the high school. We had the rabbi who came in and talked to us.
Q: So were you required to – to be the religion of your parents, or could you have decided to go to another class altogether?
A: No, no, you –
Q: You had to do it.
A: You have to do a religion. Of course, I was Jewish, so I – so I-I – I went to the – to the special classes, the rabbi who came in.
Q: Right, right.
A: And then the rabbi was involved with the – I think it was – not an Orthodox, Reform –
Q: The Reform movement.
A: – Reform synagogue, and then I took the Bar Mitzvah in the Reform synagogue.
Q: I see. But the Bar Mitzvah was not required, right?
A: No, no, it was not required.
Q: No, you – did you decide you wanted to do it, or did your parents decide, do you think?
A: No. I don’t know, everybody was doing it, so I did it.
Q: So you did it. Was there a party?
A: No party.
Q: No party, you just did the Bar Mitzvah.
A: Yeah.
Q: Did you like it? Did y – was – were you –
A: Well, I took lessons again.
Q: Yes.
A: Some Hebrew lessons, some you ha – also in the Bar Mitzvah, you had to give a little talk, mostly to thank your parents for what they did for you and so on.
Q: Right.
A: So I learned a – a Hebrew little talk
Q: Uh-huh. In Hebrew?
A: In Hebrew.
Q: Ah. And who translated it for you? Did you – did you write it in Romanian?
A: Oh no, no, I took Hebrew lessons.
Q: Oh, so you could do it.
A: Yeah. Not only that, but during the Bar Mitzvah, we were four students, and you had to go to the Torah and I think that we read a little of the Torah aloud.
Q: I see. Right.
A: So you had to learn the – how to read the script.
Q: The script from that Torah, right.
A: Yeah.
Q: So what kind of a child were you? Were you very serious? Were you a problem for your parents, what were – look at that look on your face.
A: I – I don’t know. I think that the influence of my mother was that – you see, my parents didn’t have an education. So I had to have an education and I had to be what they used to call the liberal profession. Which mean either a lawyer or a doctor or an engineer or something, you know. And there was a certain pressure to become a –
Q: A professional.
A: A professional, right.
Q: Were – did you resent it?
A: No.
Q: No, you didn’t. This was okay with you.
A: No, no, no. Well, again, we were lucky, we didn’t have to work. And the only thing, when I was in high school, I did a fair amount of sports, and you had to pass an examination, you know.
Q: Right. So what sports did you like?
A: We played soccer.
Q: Uh-huh. And you liked that?
A: We played soccer when we were 13 - 14, and then later on we played volleyball and basketball.
Q: And basketball?
A: Yeah.
Q: And your brother, your brother was younger?
A: Five years younger.
Q: Five years, oh, that’s a big difference.
A: Yeah.
Q: So were you close with him at all, or not?
A: Well, when he became older, we already had the problem with – with the Jews and he couldn’t go to the regular state school. And he had to go to a Jewish school. And –
Q: This is even before high school, yeah.
A: No, in high school.
Q: In high school.
A: In high school.
Q: I see.
A: He couldn’t go to the regular school, the ji – state school. You see, i-it was very important to go to state school, to be able to pass that – the examination, the baccalaureate, because that gives you rights to go to university and become an officer in the army and so on. The baccalaureate was very important in the – in the – with the – with the numerous [indecipherable] you know, and they started saying that the Jews cannot go to the state school, so the Jews formed their own high schools. Now, I understand from Radu that later on they recognized those schools, you see, after the war, you see, in the – they went back – my brother went back to the regular state school.
Q: I see. But that was after the war.
A: After the war, yes.
Q: So, in 1933, when Hitler takes over, you’re 11 years old, are you very conscious that – that – I mean, is there an affect in Romania at this time?
A: A li – a little – as I said again, there were all the time, I was very conscious that there was a certain amount of anti-Semitism in the – in the – Romania, you know?
Q: So you grew up with that?
A: Oh yes, no question about it.
Q: Did you join Jewish – any Jewish groups at the time?
A: I – I was – only for a short time when we – we used to play basketball and volleyball – well, that was later on, I was member of the Maccabee, that was a sports group, Jewish sports group.
Q: So you didn’t join a Zionist political party or anything –
A: No.
Q: – or a group.
A: Now I had friends, my friends that I used to play soccer in the street when I was young, later on they joined the Betar, and they were on Struma.
Q: Uh-huh. And they were killed.
A: Killed, right.
Q: Mm-hm. So you get your baccalaureate, is it 1940?
A: Right.
Q: And your – so you’re 18.
A: Right.
Q: Right. And – and by then there – there is a clear Nazi influence in Romania, is that right?
A: Well, it started – this is probably – you see, there was a lot of resentment in Romania in the – because Poland was divided in 1939, you know. And the western powers didn’t interfere. And the king felt that he cannot rely on the western power, so he made the compromise and let the Germans come in. And he also made another compromise, because he appointed the government wi-with these anti-Semitic groups. And the – the influence of Germans, and the influence of the government, they started this that the Jews cannot have business, the Jews cannot go to universities, and so on and so forth.
Q: Wa-Was there also some law against citizenship for Jews?
A: That’s right.
Q: So did you lose your citizenship?
A: Now, no.
Q: No, okay.
A: Now let me tell you about this. There were a number of laws in Romania that allowed the Jews to become citizens. In the – my father was a soldier in the World War I, and he got a citizenship because of that. But then they – they withdrew it, or they review it or something and he had to go to court again to get it back.
Q: And did he get it back?
A: I think so, yes.
Q: So did that make you safer?
A: No.
Q: It didn’t.
A: No, because when they introduce this [indecipherable] and it seems that you could not be – have a business on your name, or you cannot go to state run school, or you cannot go to universities. Was a matter of religion, not of – of citizenship. See –
Q: I see.
A: – because you see, when the things got bad, everybody got the passport, you see, and a – and wher – I got – I had a Romanian passport, my parents, especially my father, didn’t want to leave.
Q: Oh, he didn’t?
A: No. He was not a [indecipherable] and he was in the war in Romania and he felt that his place is to stay in Romania.
Q: But he couldn’t have his business any more, is that correct, or not?
A: He – I don’t remember what happened with that. Most Jews in business, what they did, they had the nom de plume, you know what I mean? Just a Christian guy name, and they were running the business, see?
Q: I see.
A: But I don’t know whether he did that or not, I – I didn’t hear about it.
Q: I see. Well, how – how did it come – it must have been awful in Romania at the time. Were you – were you, before you left, in some sort of a camp?
A: Oh yes.
Q: During – was this during the day, or you were sleeping there as well?
A: No, I was during the day in a big camp called [indecipherable]. Was a camp with thousands of Jewish adolescents, and we were building some target – you know, mounds of earth on both sides, so that the soldier can shoot targets, you see. And there is no equipment to bring the earth up to make this [indecipherable] you see.
Q: So you were digging.
A: So you had two guys, a different level, moving earth. There was a tool – I don’t know what you call that in English, I don’t know what you call it in eng –
Q: Not a shovel?
A: Shovel, right, yeah.
Q: A shovel. There were – there were no girls in this –
A: No.
Q: – there was just adolescent boys.
A: There were only [indecipherable] boys. This happened after I finished high school.
Q: So this was 1940? ’ 41?
A: ‘41
Q: ’41.
A: I spend the whole summer in – in that camp.
Q: Was that horrible?
A: Well, I got sick there twice. They had detachment, and the detachment was run by a lieutenant and the sergeant and I had – I had no trouble with them, you know.
Q: Uh-huh. And did they feed you?
A: No.
Q: No food at all during the whole day?
A: You had to bring your own food, and – but you could go home in the evening, you know.
Q: I see. So – so did everybody eat at the same time when they brought food? Did – was there a break, or you just ate when you –
A: No, no, I – I – I don’t remember exactly, I think that there was a period of rest, so to speak, you know, I mean.
Q: Uh-huh. And then you went home in the evening.
A: Yeah.
Q: And were you in two camps?
A: I was in one camp, and they discharged us from the camp because the weather you know, snow and s – and then, during the winter, they called us back because they wanted the – the parks cleaned up of snow for traffic or something.
Q: Right.
A: So we went for short time, 10 days only.
Q: Right. So let me – when – did you make the decision by yourself to leave, or did you talk with your parents?
A: I wanted to leave, but I didn’t know how to leave. And so what happened was that my – one of my father associates had a son, and he was apparently in this group that they were organizing this trip. And so my father asked me if I want to go to those meetings, so I went to the meetings where they were organizing the trip.
Q: I see. We have to change tapes, so hold the story for a moment.
End of Tape One
Beginning Tape Two
Q: So your f – your father asked whether you wanted to – to leave, or to go to these meetings.
A: So I went to these meeting, and he fel – you see, this – the son of [indecipherable] was an architect, and he was older than I was, you see, in the 30s, and I guess he felt that he is going to take care of me or help me, because I was just 19 –
Q: Right.
A: – when the meeting started.
Q: So how long did it take – you – you had decided beforehand that you had wanted to leave somehow.
A: Oh yes.
Q: Right. And your father knew that.
A: Well, you see, there was a problem where are you going to go. And in – in those days in Romania there was a very strong French influence, you see, and – and you – actually, in the – I was supposed to go on summer vacation to one of those summer courses in – in France you see, but was cancelled because of the war, and you couldn’t go there. The only other place you could go was Switzerland, and the problem was with Switzerland was that you had to deposit money in advance that you are going to have enough money to finish your school. So, we didn’t do that.
Q: Were your – since your father didn’t want to go, was your mother and father upset that you wanted to leave?
A: My mother was – he – she felt that the – she was concerned that if I stay there, I’m going to go in trouble.
Q: Because you were going to get into trouble, or because the Germans are gonna do something – cause th-the German –
A: No, no, I – I – I would – I – he wasn’t – in those days you are – you see, there was also something else that happened in Romania. When Antonescu became pri – pri – premier, he – and the king left, you see, there was – he brought in the Iron Guards, which was an extremely radical group who was also anti-Semitic. And there were stories of the Iron Guards going in homes and picking up people in the streets and so on and so forth, and my mother was very c-concerned that I’m going to get in pogrom – in a pogrom, and she got – now, my father felt that if I leave, I’ll leave forever, you know that, he wasn’t really keen about that.
Q: But your – your mother was more protective of you in a certain way, so she wanted –
A: Yeah.
Q: – so she wanted ans –
A: My mother was – if I went in the evening to – you know how boys are, they go out in the evening? She would stay at the window to watch me coming home.
Q: Cause she was worried.
A: Oh yeah.
Q: Yes. So what – what were these meetings like, that you – when you went to these meetings?
A: Well, these meetings were primarily – my understanding about this was that these people, there were originally I think 10 or 11 or something, they decided to buy a boat from a Greek person who built this boat as a sailboat for races – racing. This was a racing sailboat. And I think he was in importing and export of grain, th-the Greek guy. And they decided, th-that they are going to – to buy it, and so they were organizing the – they were talking, where are we going to get the maps, the boat head, a small engine. One of the guys was supposed to be a knowledge of mechanic, and he was supposed to take care of the engine. And then where are we go – th-the – what kind of luggage we can take, you know, we’re not supposed to take luggage because there was no place, just socks, you see. And then there was a lot of talk about, if we leave in the winter or spring, the rail – you see, this boat – and this is why we had trouble with, had a big mast with sails. And to keep the mast up you have to have a keel under – under the boat. And the question was, how are you going to use the sail if in the winter when the rail where the sail goes up and down like a zipper is going to freeze, you see? So they were talking about all these things, you see?
Q: And did you have a particular skill that they were going to use, or you were just going –
A: No, no.
Q: No, you had no skill?
A: I – there – there – as I say, there was one guy, a mechanic, and there was another guy, I think, who had some experiences with – with boats. No, they made a decision right away that they are going to take captain and the sailor that na – as navigators and that’s what they did.
Q: Now, let me ask you something: did you know what was going on in terms of the actions against Jews in Romania at that time?
A: Sure.
Q: You did. And did y – did you want to leave just because you thought it was going to get bad, or did you – did you want to leave because you thought you actually could get killed?
A: No, I wanted to leave because I wanted the different life, where – whe – where – let me – let me kind of give you an example. I-In Romania that time, if you were a Jew, and you needed some papers, you had to pay money to some intermediary and he will give you the paper, or he will give you a passport [indecipherable]. He had connections, see? And – and he continuously was – for instance, to give you another example: the Jews were supposed to give money to the government, you know, some kind of a like a special income or something like this, income tax or something like this. My father didn’t want to go and argue with them, and I went with – with my mother in front of this – and this was Jewish people who were trying to get money from the Jews. Also, there was a question at that time about moving Jews to Transnistria. You know about Transnistria?
Q: Ta-Talk about it a little bit.
A: What? Transnistria – where the Germans were in – in Europe, you know, they controlled Europe, at one time in th – this was also the Romanian government, there was an area over the Dniester, you know, which is – actually, there is a small republic there called Moldavia during the – during the Russians – i-in the Russia before, and they wanted to move the Jews there in Transnistria, the rumors were that also.
Q: So all of these things, in-including the life even before the influence of the Nazis, and their [indecipherable] you – you wanted –
A: Well, you see, it was a combination of the Romanian government, be-because they a – they accepted the German [indecipherable] without fighting, and these anti-Semitic groups like the Legionnaires, that they adopted the German policies against the Jews. Q: Did you talk to your brother about leaving, or not?
A: No.
Q: He was too young.
A: I thought about that, but he was 14 year old when I left, and I tell you frankly, I didn’t want to take the responsibility.
Q: So you didn’t want to take him.
A: No, I felt that I can risk my life, but why should I risk his life?
Q: So, who bought the boat? Everybody who was going –
A: Everybody contributed some money. There were some people who contributed a little more, a little less, I don’t know what was the – the deal. I don’t – my father never said something, but he paid some money for that.
Q: He paid some money. It’s expensive to buy a boat. No?
A: I guess so, I don’t know. I don’t know how much it was.
Q: You’re not sure, uh-huh.
A: He never mentioned how much it was.
Q: So you have to – you had a passport already, right? So –
A: We had a passport.
Q: Okay.
A: And we had the destination visa, you had to have that too. And so there was a consul from some South American – honorary consul from South America, and again for some fee he will give you a visa.
Q: So you had a visa to some South American country.
A: Yeah, yeah, and the passport.
