National Council of Jewish Women
Sarasota-Manatee Section HOLOCAUST ORAL HISTORY PROJECT
Anita Weinberg, survivor
July 20, 1987
Sarasota, Florida
INTRODUCTION Today is July 20, 1987, and I am at the home of Anita Weinberg on Bird Key in Sarasota, Florida. Mrs. Weinberg has kindly consented to be interviewed about her own experiences before, during and after the Holocaust.
Mrs. Weinberg, we appreciate your willingness to make this tape because we think it is very important that people not forget what happened.
Q: So the people who will be listening to this have a better understanding of you as a person, will you tell us about your early life, your childhood, what your parents did for a living, where you were born, what year you were born, things that will help us see you as a whole person.
A: I was born in Warsaw, Poland to (a) family...not very religious...Jewish...rather assimilated and my father was (a) chemical engineer and my mother graduated from...
Q: What kind of a school?
A: My mother finished school of economics and they lived in Warsaw and when (the) war started my...we had to move to Ghetto Warsaw. And no one asked if we were religious, and we were not religious. We had to move to Lashault (?) that was closed behind the walls.
Q: How old were you when this took place...when you had to move to this Ghetto?
A: I was about five years old. The war started (when) I was four years old.
Q: When you talk about the war, what year are you talking about? You are talking about the invasion of Poland?
A: I can’t tell you exactly because the war started in 1939 and I was four years old but the Ghetto started in 1940 or ‘41... I don’t remember exactly but I think I was five years old.
Q: What were the conditions in the Ghetto? Were they quite different from your way of life before?
A: Very, very, very bad. I don’t remember everything. But I remember the bad things.
Q: Tell us about it.
A: The selections...how they call this...like Germans came to and told everybody to go down to the yard...of... we lived in a big building...and everybody had to go down. And we lived with my mother’s parents and they were telling the old people to go down and to check the papers. And people that worked in Ghetto, they had preference to stay still in their apartments...they checked the papers, but old people they took first. And I remember one morning when we had selection and my grandparents...my mother’s parents, were taken one of the first.
Q: The selection was to simply move from the regular part of the city to the Ghetto.
A: No! Selection was to go to the trains. To...they were telling they are taking this people away, nobody knew where they were going.
Q: When you had to move to the Ghetto, did all of you move to the Ghetto together?
A: Yes. Yes, we moved with parents of my mother. They...I have to replay for myself. Later my mother stayed home and I was home, too. But my father worked. He worked for Germans in...as a chemical engineer. They needed him...he got very good papers.
Q: He could go in and out of the Ghetto freely?
A: No, he worked in Ghetto for Germans and he lived...he left the home every morning and we stayed at home with my mom. It was very...there was no food. The Polish people were bringing a little food to us. There was no food. And my mother was trying to send me to the other side, to the Polish side because I had my nanny that lived there and she wanted me there, and she wanted to hide me. But everybody knew I am Jewish girl in her house.
Q: Before you moved to the Ghetto, your family lived in a much larger place?
A: We had a very nice house in Warsaw. And we had a nanny that worked for us. She was...I was only one daughter at home...and we had woman that was...when I was born and she worked for us many years. And she would...she loved me like her own child. And when we were moved to Ghetto, she wanted to help us, but she couldn’t. Then my mother found out somebody that brought food to the Ghetto because it was a very little food in the Ghetto and to send me to the Polish side. But that took time too. That was what she decided already to do everything possible to send me out of Ghetto. It was after one selection that we went downstairs - and it was...they were checking...it was on the street, it was not close to our house. Everybody was on the street in Ghetto. They were checking the papers. Even my father’s papers, the best papers - they needed him at work - they decided to tell us to go to the trains too...and it was just one moment of good thinking...my mother and father just pulled me to the side of people that would stay...and they just didn’t want to do second selection for one family. We just mixed with the people that would stay and after this is my mother saw that the good papers doesn’t say anything. She decided that they don’t protect you forever, that you’ll survive, she decided to do everything to send me out of Ghetto. And she paid the woman that brought butter and food to Ghetto people. And she promised her money, her jewelry, her...everything my mother had to bring me to the Polish side to my nanny. And that was exactly what my mother did. She promised and she did. She took me.
Q: Can you remember that? Did you know you were being taken away from your parent?
A: No, I can’t remember. I just remember my staying with my nanny. That I had...that people didn’t like this little Jewish girl. I was...I spoke very good Polish. I didn’t know any other language, just Polish. I was brought up in a home that was only one language, Polish. But people knew that I am Jewish in this place that my nanny lived and they started to tell that if she will not (get) rid of this little Jewish girl they will tell the Germans. After that she was trying to find some place for me. And that was the place...a Catholic convent in Warsaw. But she had to tell and lie and to tell me the same lie. I had always to have father, and they were killed during the war. And she told (taught) me Polish prayers, Catholic prayers. I still think I was more genius than I am now. Because I learned I was very quick. I learned all the prayers. When I came to convent I knew to lie. I knew to tell the prayers. I was like any other Polish girl. I never could say I am Jewish, or my mother is in Ghetto or my father is in Ghetto or I have family here. Everything was a big lie. And I had to continue the same lie to tell. I was for two and a half years in this convent.
Q: Were there other children in this convent?
A: There was another girl for a short time because...it was good luck that these Catholic sisters accepted me. The first days I came I got measles. And with very high fever and I was in infirmary and even with this high fever I had always to remember, to lie. I am an orphan and to know all the prayers. And my mother, she came after she got notice that I am already in the convent and I am sick. She couldn’t come to visit me because she was so scared. She came to...she ran away from Ghetto too. Because she had nothing to lose. Because one day, after I was already on Polish side, my father went to work and never came back. Like that she decided (she had) nothing to lose anymore. She has to get to Polish side.
Q: You were an only child?
A: I was the only child. She came to my nanny too. It was...she had a little good luck somehow, she ran away. And she stayed with my nanny too. And my nanny told her that I have measles. She couldn’t come to visit me because she was scared when she comes after awhile I didn’t see her that I would say “Mama” and that would be normal to child, sick child. She never visited me during my sickness.
Q: Did she visit you afterwards?
A: No, she didn’t visit me. I had the day off once a month and my aunt, my mother’s sister would come to pick me up. And I remember to tell (call) her “lady with her name” and not my aunt. I really remember. I think that was the instinct of survival. The children were so smart. Because normally children forget all these little things.
Q: What was your life like in the convent? What did you do there?
A: I was very lucky. The sisters weren’t so good because we didn’t have very good food. We had to go to prayer every morning at 6 o’clock, I was so little and...
Q: You were six and a half by then?
A: Six and a half, seven. And it was tiring to get up at 6 o’clock to go to church every morning. But one thing was very good, I never miss school. I always went to school. And I don’t know...I don’t remember day by day how it was. But I went to school, we had food, not the best food. Very, bad food. I had to save pieces of bread. Because the oatmeal was so terrible it was cooked in a big pot and always a little burned. After the war I never ate oatmeal. One thing I can’t take to my mouth is oatmeal.
Q: Where did you go to school?
A: That was in Warsaw. They (the convent) had their own school, the sisters.
Q: You were the only child staying there?
A: Oh no. There were a lot a children. That was orphanage. It was orphanage. Only I was the only one that (was a) Jewish child. It was a big orphanage. Big orphanage. There were older children, younger children...I remember another thing later when my mother was on the Polish side she couldn’t live with my nanny. She got other help. Because all her (the nanny’s) neighbors again knew she’s (the mother) Jewish. They didn’t want to see her. (She was helped by) her cousin. German origins. And she helped my mother to get away to another place. With her friend, a German, he came like he came to arrest her and he brought her another place. Later my mother had to color her hair blond, her eyebrows blond, her eye lashes blond to look different, (so that) no one in Warsaw would recognize her. And will tell this is a Jewish woman. She got fatter and she went and she worked in a German restaurant in the kitchen, helping the cook.
Q: A restaurant would be good place to work in those days.
A: Yeah, because no one would never think that a Jewish woman would have guts to work in a German restaurant.
Q: Not only that, she would have food.
A: She had food and no one suspected that it was a Jewish woman. She looked so different. If you change your color of your eye brows, eye lashes, it changes your face a lot. With blond hair, she was dark hair. And she got a little fatter too.
Q: Did she ever find out what became of her husband, your father.
A: She never heard a word from him. I had later...after the war...I always believed...like I heard people are coming back that I would meet him. I was walking on the streets and looking at ll men’s faces. Maybe I would be the lucky one and my father would come from some concentration camp and I will meet him on the street. Like one year after the war I (still) believed I would be the lucky one. He never came. All these people from Ghetto Warsaw didn’t survive.
Q: When you lived in the Ghetto and you talked before about the selection process, did your parents know what was happening to the people who were selected to go on the trains. Did they have any real information that people were being exterminated.
A: Yes, they knew. But not in the beginning in Ghetto when the selections started. I think people believed that these people are taken to work like outside Warsaw. They didn’t know in the beginning. But later they knew already. My mother didn’t have this hopes like I had because I was more optimistic after the war. I read all the stories that some fathers are coming and some families are reunited. And I just thought I would be the lucky one. But my mother never had hope.
Q: Can you remember your family telling you how they felt. Were they terrified? Were they angry? What kind of feelings did they have about this experience at the time?
A: My mother, during the war, never was terrified. I was too little to be terrified. My mother was very calm, very realistic. And I think she always talked about survival. And about having her child to survive. I don’t think even the loss of her husband was as bad as in our times now for a woman. She just...she lost so many people. She lost her whole family. Like...her husband really didn’t... She didn’t miss him. She had to work. She had to survive herself. She was very brave. I think no one in our times is as brave as people were in the time of the war.
Q: I don’t think we can even understand how much bravery it took. Were you in the orphanage...the convent, and did your mother continue to work at the restaurant until the end of the war?
A: No, no. I was in the convent in Warsaw only until the uprising in Warsaw, not Ghetto Warsaw. In Warsaw was uprising by Polish people, not by Jewish people.
Q: Tell me about that. I don’t think I know about that.
A: I can’t tell you too much. Because I again was very lucky because it (the uprising) was in summer time and our orphanage went out of Warsaw to their place...like a suburb of Warsaw. And we didn’t stay in the city. All the orphanage with the sisters, we survived because we weren’t in the town...in the city.
Q: Was it like a summer home, or a camp?
A: It was like camp, or like a summer vacation. All the orphanage went, because I was only one Jewish girl. It was in the beginning another Jewish girl, but I think she...they recognized that she was Jewish and they told her mother to take her away. I was the only one Jewish. I knew it wasn’t any other.
Q: What can you tell me about the Polish uprising?
A: About Polish uprising, I can’t tell you too much because I wasn’t (there) during this time, I was away. But my mother was in Warsaw... I think she ran away, I have to ask her, I never know exactly the times when...how she ran away. Because after...just before the end of war, my aunt came and stole me from this orphanage because if she wouldn’t come and take me just without asking she would have to go through courts and to prove that I am Jewish girl and I’m daughter of my mother. It would take too long. One day, just before the end, my aunt, my mother’s sister, came and just stole me. I went like I was in pair of underwear.
Q: Just with the clothes on your back.
A: Just with the clothes on my back.
Q: Where do you go?
A: She brought me to my mother. That was maybe 20 kilometers from...it was close to Warsaw, suburb of Warsaw. A little town.
Q: Were you nervous about that? Were you excited?
A: I was very excited. I was very excited. Oh, I loved it. I remember my mother it was...I wasn’t a baby...I was just two and a half years there. It was such a good feeling. It wasn’t the war years.
Q: About when was that?
A: It was in 1945. But it wasn’t...the war ended in May 1945. It was in spring, 1945. I don’t remember exactly the dates. I think my mother remembers so much better. She was grown up.
Q: Then you and your mother lived together in Poland?
A: We lived together in Poland. Later we moved to Lodz in Poland in 1945. And we stayed until 1950.
Q: Do you remember the day the war ended? How did people act?
A: I can’t really tell you. I don’t remember. I just remember another very sad thing from Ghetto. Maybe I remember very sad things well and very good things well. That how child’s memory works. I remember in Ghetto little bodies of children in garbages. This I remember, you know, in like public garbages bodies of children. That I remember.
Q: This was about when, before you went to the convent?
A: Before in Ghetto, before I went to the convent.
Q: Children who had starved?
A: Starved to death. And children begging for food on the streets. That I remember.
Q: Did you have enough to eat at the convent?
A: I know only one word in Jewish from Ghetto, “rachmanus.”
Q: What’s that mean?
A: That’s only one word I know.
Q: And that means?
A: I think help, or something (have pity). I remember this from Ghetto. I never spoke Jewish, I learned Hebrew in Israel. I remember little things like this that’s really funny. What I ate on day of selection that my grandparents were taken away. Because children have memory to little things. Like something stays in their memory. I didn’t like to remember the bad things. But they stayed with me, they stayed forever. I don’t remember a lot from the orphanage because they weren’t such a good things, it wasn’t something so good for me. I had always to remember to lie. There were a little things in orphanage that I went through that were hurting me. I had to go to First Communion. And I knew this is the biggest sin, to go to communion and not to have Christening.
Q: But it was a means of survival.
A: But I had to go. But I remember how the priests was telling...that the most...that this is a worst sin. And I was scared what I am doing. But I had to go. Because I had to lie. I had to lie. If I would tell now, I am Jewish, they would tell my nanny take me...take her. She can’t stay here, she’s Jewish girl. Because the sisters were scared too.
Q: You said that you stayed in Poland from the end of the war, 1945, until 1950. Was that because you chose to stay or was it not possible to leave before that?
A: No, it was not possible to stay. My mother...the minute it was possible to go to Israel she decided we can’t stay one day longer. She just wanted to leave Poland.
Q: What was your life like during that five years?
A: It was good. I lived with my mother and she worked. Wasn’t like the United States. It was far from this but I had food to eat. My mother worked all day, I went to school. I had to help her. I had to cook dinners. I played ball. I watched potatoes burning, always when I came they were burning. I missed the years to be a little free. The time in orphanage I was like...it wasn’t like a real childhood. It wasn’t what we think is a happy childhood.
Q: The nuns were very strict?
A: They were strict. There was a lot of praying. And I wasn’t used to this. One thing we had school. I don’t think I was happy. I was always thinking about my family. About the war. How to lie. I think I was...I wasn’t a child. I was a little grown-up.
Q: During those five years, did you experience any anti-semitism. The five years from the end of the war until you went to Israel?
A: I didn’t myself, because I have Polish Catholic friends. And myself...I used a different name. I used all the time in the orphanage I used not my family name. I had a different name than my mother when I was in orphanage.
Q: What about after the orphanage?
A: And after orphanage I just took my mother’s name. That was a Polish name too, that she had papers working for this German restaurant. She has to have papers with Polish name. She bought Polish papers.
Q: So you weren’t easily identified as being Jewish?
A: I just decided... No one suspected that I am Jewish girl. My looks were a little Jewish, but my Polish was perfect. They were maybe not as sure. But I don’t think they liked very much Jewish people. But I just behaved like Polish. I still went to church after the war. My mother couldn’t tell me one day, “stop it.” Because it’s a shock for a child. The child was...I was so many years in this lie. Living the lie, that she just waited slowly...it would stop. Even no one around me, my mother, my aunt, and my cousin...people...not one of them went to church. I still went to church with my friends on Sunday. I wanted to be just like them. Children wants to be the same.
Q: How did you feel when your mother told you that you were going to be moving to Israel?
A: I wasn’t too happy. I wasn’t too happy. I believed that Israel would be like (a) station for me between Poland and the United States. We had some family in United States that my mother said if you will not like it, we will move to the United States. But I like it, and after a short while, I loved it. I really loved it.
Q: What was it like coming to a Jewish state, where you were suddenly part of the majority of the population?
A: I didn’t have this feeling like people have this...they were brought up with zionism. I wasn’t brought up...
Q: Brought up with what?
A: Like they dream about Israel. I didn’t dream israel, I was too little. No one was telling me the stories about Israel and even during this five years after war I.. . no one really told me about Israel state. I didn’t have Jewish friends. My mother was busy working. For me was really all what I got from the Jewish nationality I got when I came to Israel. I think it was a great thing that I have no place to be in Israel it was my mother because she got some place as a widow to live. And they didn’t want to keep widow with a child. Like that I had no choice, I had to go to kibbutz. Went to kibbutz in Sha’ar.
Q: Which is in what part of Israel?
A: It’s close to Hadera, like between Haifa and Tel Aviv. It was an older kibbutz. It has very very nice people. It was from Ha-Shomer Ha-Za’ir, it’s a youth organization. I got there everything what I needed. And I like...I felt Jewish and I feel Jewish. I’m not really religious but I feel Jewish by nationality. And that’s what I really wanted.
Q: You have a big smile on your face as you recall this, as though it’s a very pleasant recollection.
A: I really got something that maybe you can just find if you know a teacher to teach you or to put in your heart. I got what I needed in this kibbutz. I.. . that was a great experience for me and it was a wonderful start in Israel because I learned and I worked.
Q: What else can you tell us? How long did you stay in the kibbutz?
A: I (it) was about two years.
Q: Why did you leave?
A: I liked this life. It was like...the same...it was young group. I was fifteen year old. It was very wonderful life there. I really started to love Israel from minute I came to kibbutz. It’s not too hard even we had to get up every morning at 6 o’clock and to go to work. Tend the field for four hours.
Q: What did you do in the field?
A: We were picking tomatoes, potatoes, in vegetable field. Was hard, was very hot, like summer in Sarasota (Florida). But I was young and nothing gets too difficult to work four hours early in the morning until about 12 o’clock until lunch time. At lunch, then we came...we ate lunch, we had to take showers. And we started our studying. Most children didn’t know the language, some had a little idea. I didn’t have a bit (of) knowledge of Hebrew language. I had to learn from the beginning. I didn’t know letters, the language was for me like Chinese. But in this age everything comes easy. I was falling asleep a little after four hours of work in the fields in the heat, but somehow I learned and I knew the language not too bad. And I decided that I have to finish my high school and I decided to leave the kibbutz and my mother. Have a little apartment.
Q: Where was your apartment?
A: In Tel Aviv. And I came to her apartment. I decided I have to finish high school but I couldn’t go to high school in the morning because my mother couldn’t have the money. Like I worked.
Q: You had to pay to go to high school?
A: No, not the high school. The high school was free. Just the living expenses. It was too much for my mother. Like I worked from 8 o’clock to 2 o’clock and went to school from 4 o’clock to 9:30.
Q: It was a long day.
A: It was a very long day. I finished my high school in Tel Aviv. The living place wasn’t as easy like United States but everything was working very good. Because I wasn’t yet as spoiled like I am now. I lived with my mother on fifth floor without elevator. I had in the morning to run to bring a big ice block to our ice box before work.
Q: You didn’t have refrigerator.
A: No, we had an ice box. We didn’t have a refrigerator. But the life was very nice in Israel...in Tel Aviv. And I had a lot of friends.
Q: This was about 1951 or 52, 53?
A: 1952, 1953 almost.
Q: Did you have to go into the army then?
A: When I graduated from high school. Every child has to go to the army. I was already nineteen because I missed a little school. When you are eighteen, you have to go to the army. But all time you are in high school they postpone your service. I went at nineteen in 1954 and I stayed until 1956. I finished my army as a sergeant.
Q: What part of the army did you serve in?
A: I worked in computers. IBM computers in statistics. I liked it very much. I learned a lot too. Army was a great place to learn about life. And a good experience, because the training its only few weeks. The real training as a soldier. Later I worked with IBM as an operator. And I worked and learned during my army service. It was very good.
Q: Where did you...
A: I don’t regret a minute that I went for just two years. It was a good life...school of life. I wish my children would have this school of life I just don’t like when you have to go to army to fight. But if you are in a quiet time, it’s great for kids.
Q: Good discipline.
A: It’s a good discipline.
Q: They say that children who lived on kibbutz do very well in the army because they learn how to be cooperative and to work with other people.
A: It’s easier...it’s easier for children from kibbutz, because they are not as spoiled. They have had a very hard life. I think any life in group with discipline is a good school of life. I wish many times my children will have a two years of discipline in the army. But not during war times.
Q: Unfortunately we can’t pick and choose those times. How did you meet your husband? And how did you come to the United States.
A: I met my husband in my last days of army service. I just me him at my friend’s house and he was (there) from ‘48. 1948 he came in Israel. But he came knowing about Israel much more.
Q: He came also from Poland?
A: He came from Poland but he came to fight for Israel in 1948. He was older than me. He came prepared...what is Israel. he came with group called Palmach. He was like fighting for the state of israel.
Q: It was an underground group?
A: It wasn’t underground. It was Jewish group that came to fight for Israel. They were like in youth camps and they knew what it (meant)...(the meaning of the) Jewish state. I didn’t know this. I met him and I was already twenty-one. I married very quick after nine months. But we were (in) Israel for two years and we didn’t have yet children and we decided we want to see the world. And it was easy not to have children. And he got an opportunity to go to Africa. And he loves Africa. He waited to see (it). And if you don’t have money, you have first to get a job. You can’t go as a tourist without money. He accepted a job with Israel company, (name of company?) , and we went to Nigeria.
Q: What kind of work did he do?
A: He worked with...highway. Engineer, they built new highways in Nigeria.
Q: Then the Nigerian government hired the Israel [ ]...
A: The Nigeria government hired the Israel company. We were a big company there because there were a lot of Israel families who spoke Hebrew there. We had so many friends that I continue to speak Hebrew all the time I was in Africa. I felt I was in “Little Israel.” We just spoke Hebrew. I forgot here my Hebrew. I don’t have opportunity to speak. Africa, I spoke during four years of Hebrew.
Q: Then what did you do?
A: After four years my husband with the same company was transferred to Nepal because they build this small... Not small, small to compare to United States. ...they enlarged their airport. Before they could use only very small planes because the airport was very little. And he was working in construction and enlarging the new airport in Nepal. That was a very beautiful place. The most beautiful place, I think. All surrounded by the Himalayan Mountains and you can see the whole year round the mountains covered in snow. Beautiful climate too, very nice people. It’s dirty.
Q: A lot of poverty?
A: It’s a lot of poverty because there is almost no middle class. It’s all poor or rich.
Q: I think you told me before we started taping that you had two children at that time.
A: I had two children in Africa. When we came to Africa, I decided I will check if it’s a place to have child. I wanted very much to have a big family because I was only one. That wasn’t my mother’s fault. That was World War II fault that she didn’t have more kids. But I really missed...my one thing that I always dreamt was to have a family. I’m very family oriented and I love it. And the first thing I came, I just checked if it’s possiblle to have children in Africa. There was a university hospital. And I had my first child after one year and later I had another child two years later. It was easy to bring them up with the help in Africa. I liked to live there. I’m not sorry I went. It’s a lovely experience. It’s so much easier to go when you are young. Nothing bothers you. You don’t miss the electric appliances, you didn’t miss anything. You are so much stronger. You take everything a different way.
Q: More adaptable?
A: You are more adaptable. I don’t think I would say the same words going now and living with tiny kids in Africa. I wouldn’t be as happy.
Q: You’re a very international person, you’ve lived in so many places.
A: Thank you.
Q: And when did you come to the United States?
A: I came in 1965. On our way back from Nepal we stopped in Israel and we left the kids with my mother.
(BREAK; turn tape over) We came to United States. We didn’t have yet too much money. Like that we decided we will take Greyhound bus to see as much as we can. With mountains and highways. We went from San Francisco Greyhound.
Q: How long did you take to make this trip?
A: Maybe ten months. I had some relatives in Los Angeles and he was very nice. He helped my husband...just one telephone call to get his first job later when he came back to New York City. He said he would just call some friends and my husband got in his profession as an engineer, civil engineer, his first job. We just start to...we could stay in United States. I went back to pick up the children and I stayed a few months in Israel. And he started to work. And my husband started like new life. I think America is really the land of opportunity and he always dream about it. He got opportunity and he started to work very hard. He had to start like from the beginning. All his experience from Africa, from Israel, from Poland was nothing. He had to start from beginning. He had to run forty floors up and down as superintendent of building in Newark, New Jersey. But he was happy, he liked it. And slowly he worked...he changed jobs and he opened his own company in New York City. He was very glad we made this move to the United States. We never complained, we were happy in Israel, we were happy in Africa, we were happy in Nepal, but I think America gives you opportunity more than any other country.
Q: I have spoken to many people who were survivors of the Holocaust and almost everyone makes this comment somewhere along the line about the wonderful opportunity.
A: My husband say it was maybe a little late. If he would came a little late that maybe like 40 years old he would have already a big experience and more behind him. But if you want you can always start a little later. It’s still time, it’s never too late. I think you can give to your children in America everything if you just want to work hard. The most important thing to give them is an education. And you really can give them here.
Q: Before we stop the taping, I sort of directed what I wanted you to talk about. Are there things we would like to add or that you have remembered since we discussed other aspects of your earlier life that you would like to leave us.
A: I just would like to tell to other people, not to forget that it was Holocaust. And so many millions of Jewish people were murdered. And some people are hesitating and trying to say that it wasn’t...and it’s not true. It Holocaust that people went through. Terrible times and they lost families and I think they are very very brave...that they really could start their lives again and again even they lost so many close relatives.
Q: That includes you.
A: Yes, I was a child. I really didn’t start my life again. But like my mother went through her life alone from 1942. She never remarried. She gave me everything. I wish my children really remember what happened during this years of World War II. It’s hard to remind them because for them it is just history. But for me, it’s really my past and I think my life would be very different if I would have family, if I would have father. But children now take everything for granted. I think the most important things we have we take it for granted too. But I wish they will always have in their heart something... I don’t think they could have hatred toward German people because you can’t say...that’s a new generation now or toward Polish Catholic people, that’s a different generation. But I think people can’t forget what happened during the war. You have to read...it’s a history. But always remember not to let happen again.
WRAP-UP I think that’s an important message to conclude with. And it’s really the focus of our whole program. That you very much for allowing us to record your experiences. They’re really very valuable.
