United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Anita Etzyon
September 3, 2009
RG-50.106*0175 PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of an audiotaped interview with Anita Etzyon, conducted by Gail Schwartz on September 3, 2009 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview. ANITA EYZYON
September 3, 2009 Beginning Tape One, Side A
Question: This is the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum volunteer collection interview with Anita Weingarten Etzyon, conducted by Gail Schwartz on September 3rd, 2009 in Potomac, Maryland. This is tape number one, side A. What is your full name?
Answer: My full name is Anita Etzyon.
Q: And what name were you born with?
A: I was born Anita Weingarten.
Q: And where and when were you born?
A: I was born in 1941.
Q: What -- what day?
A: October 4th, 1941 in a town, or city at that time in Poland. The name of the town is Boryslaw.
Q: All right, let’s talk a little bit -- let’s talk a little bit about your family, who your parents were.
A: Okay, my father, his name was Marek, in -- in engli -- in America he would probably be called Mark. Marek Weingarten and my birth mom, her name was Ethel Birenbaum from Chelm. Once she married my father, she became Ethel Weingarten.
Q: Ah, let -- let’s talk about your father’s background, what do you know about that? Where he was from?
A: He was born also in Boryslaw, Poland in 1906. April 25th, 1906, because my son was born 70 years down the road, April 25th, 1976. So I remember that. His background was, from what he told me, is that at one point as a child he was sent away to -- I don’t know if it was an orphanage or it was like a youth home for children. And he stayed there for awhile, and I think he was also schooled in that area. And then he returned. He also told me that his ancestors, or his father, which is actually my grandfather, his father came from Vienna. And in those days they made shidduchim, a shidduch, so he was matched up with my grandmother, who was from Poland, and apparently from Boryslaw. So that’s how the famil -- th-the roots of the family came from Vienna into Poland into Boryslaw. And my father became a craftsman, but the word -- what’s -- not a mechanic, but what is that called, the people who do fences from metal.
Q: An iron -- an ironworker, or --
A: I-I would say yeah. Worked with iron and created all kinds of things. And then s -- an-and -- and I think also my grandfather was involved in it, but after awhile he gave it up and he decided to assemble bicycles. And he opened a little workshop for himself and he employed his younger brother and he also employed a young man in that workshop and that’s what they did, they assembled bicycles and sold bicycles because it -- in those years, that was the mean of transportation, or you had a horse and a carriage, or you took the train. Not too many cars were yet in Poland. But what he told me that his dream was, before the war, to import cars into Poland and develop this -- this -- this whole idea of transportation. Well, unfortunately it didn’t work out, World War 2 broke out and those dreams were shattered. The other thing also, which I can mention it, he told me that he also was drafted into the Polish army and he served in the Polish army as a soldier.
Q: What years was that?
A: That is a good question.
Q: Is this the --
A: I think it was -- it must have been -- if he was born in 906, he must have been in his late 20’s, I would say, maybe 22 - 24. And -- and he was very good in math, so he told me -- I asked him what was your job there in -- in the Polish army. And he told me it was buchalterie, which means it had to do with papers, and --
Q: Bookkeeping.
A: -- bookkeeping and whatever that was involved in.
Q: Do y --
A: He -- he was fluent in German, and wrote German and he was fluent in -- in -- in the Polish language and wrote and read Polish, so -- you know.
Q: Do you know if he experienced any anti-Semitism in the Polish army?
A: No, he never mentioned that, no, no. But --
Q: Was he a religious man?
A: He came from a religious background, but he was not a religious man at all. He just simply turned away from religion. He felt that religion separates people and that was his outlook on life.
Q: Let’s now talk about your mother and how they met, about your mother’s background?
A: Yeah, I -- my mother’s background --
Q: Your birth -- your birth mother.
A: My birth mother, now I don’t know when she was born, but I know that she passed away when she was like 26 - 27, so --
Q: Which means you were how old?
A: Oh, I wasn’t even a year old, so if we can add to ’41 -- go -- you know, go back. So that must have been --
Q: So she died in 1942?
A: Yeah, yes, she did, right.
Q: Mm-hm, mm-hm.
A: And what do I know about her? From -- very little that whatever my father told me about her. She was a dressmaker and studied in Vienna. And apparently she was a very good one, very talented.
Q: What -- what was her name?
A: Ethel.
Q: And her last name?
A: And her last name was Birenbaum. Ethel Birenbaum. And then, you know, when my father met her -- and I think my father was in his 30’s when he got married, I think maybe 33 - 34, something like that.
Q: Mm-hm. Mm-hm.
A: And I think they were married a short time, maybe hardly two years and -- and less -- probably less than even two years. But --
Q: [indecipherable] were married, they had you as their child. How did you get the name Anita in Poland?
A: The name Anita, my father said he named me Anita because when he ended up in that orphanage or boys’ dormitory, whatever it was, or -- or -- you know, when you send -- it was, I guess, customary in Europe to send children sometimes to go to school away from home, and from what he told me that his family, financially it was difficult for them to raise four children, so they sent him away as a young kid. And he said the woman that attended in that orphanage, her name was Anita and she was very kind and very nice and he said if ever he will have a child, and she will be a girl, he will name her Anita, and that’s how I got the name Anita.
Q: Okay. Obviously you -- you were too young to know what was happening between ’41 and ’45 in Poland.
A: Right.
Q: Did your father remarry?
A: My father remarried after -- immediately after the war. I was --
Q: Oh, after the war.
A: After, immediately after. Not during the war, after the war.
Q: Okay, let’s talk now --
A: Okay.
Q: -- between ’41 and ’45, which obviously you don’t remember. What -- have you --
A: But what I --
Q: -- what have you been told about those years?
A: Okay. Okay, I --
Q: Dealing with your story.
A: Right. I was told that the fellow that worked for my father, he was a Christian and I think a Baptist, he mentioned they were Baptists. And he lived not in Boryslaw, but -- but in a nearby village, apparently not too far. And when the war broke out -- and I was born in ’41, in October, it was very difficult to hide with me as a child, and my father approached him. And apparently they were very good friends on top of everything else, and my father approached him and asked him if he would go to his -- he wasn’t married yet, but he had a girlfriend, and his girlfriend was a teacher in that village. And he said, you know, we cannot hide with my baby. Would you be willing to take her? I’ll pay you whatever I have, I’ll -- you know, my money, and whatever I have in terms of furniture, and anything that I have, I will give you and I’ll help you to settle. Talk it over with your girlfriend. And so he did and -- his girlfriend at that time. They said -- she said fine, we marry, but we will have to move to another place because where did this kid come from, you know?
Q: Your -- you --
A: The neighbors would see a baby they would immediately know that they are harboring a Jewish kid. Hiding.
Q: And you’re -- you’re about a year old now?
A: No, I was less. I must have been like five months, four or five months. Very young, very little.
Q: Oh, I thought you said your birth mother survived for a year after you were --
A: Separate, not with me. She was hidden separately.
Q: Oh, oh.
A: She -- we were -- yeah.
Q: At this time your --
A: At this -- no --
Q: -- your birth mother was still alive?
A: Mi -- at this time my birth mother was still alive, but we were separated. I was given to the Baptist family. Her name was Stefka if I remember correctly. His name I haven’t -- I don’t know. The guy’s name I don’t know. Her -- her husband. Which eventually they married and moved to another town. She was a teacher and apparently she got a job as a teacher. And with my father’s financial help that he gave them, they were willing to take me -- and since they had no children, cause they were a young couple. And that’s how I ended up with them. But in the meantime --
Q: What -- what town did you -- do they take you to?
A: This I have no clue. My father never mentioned the name and I don’t -- even if he did I don’t remember the ti -- the town. So I spent with them til 19 -- til the end of the war, which was like 1945.
Q: Do you have any memories of those years? You were only four, obviously, when you --
A: Not quite four, because I think -- what I remember --
Q: Right.
A: -- not the --
Q: You were three, three and a half.
A: -- three and a half.
Q: Any memory --
A: Well, I remember the journey, on a big truck that they came and picked me up with his new wife that my father remarried. I remember -- what I remember after the war, we ended up in a apartment building, in a tall apartment building, and I remember my father brought little Dominoes and we were building something with stacking up the Dominoes and if I’m not mistaken he lit a -- a match and he put like a match in between those Dominoes and somehow I have this image. Whether it really happened, that’s what, you know, I don’t know. But that’s what I remember, sitting in an apartment building once I was apparently taken from the Christian family.
Q: Now, what was happening to your father and your birth mother in those years?
A: Okay. My father told me that he was captured, couple times by the Germans. And the way he told me, that the Germans used to come into the town --
Q: He stayed in Boryslaw?
A: He stayed in Boryslaw. And what they did, they knew -- it was called aksia, like you know, on this and that day the Germans are coming and speaking to the Jewish authorities, the rabbis, whatever it is, we need so many Jewish workers for a certain project. Please make sure that on this and that date they all concentrate in the square, they are ready to go. We build a bridge, or whatever it may be. And my father was pretty clever, he realized that at that time already, you know, there were rumors that they are being sent, but they’re not being sent to build bridges or whatever it is. So prior to that aksia he used to run away and escape from Boryslaw. During the time -- I’m going back now -- he managed to hide my mother -- my birth mother and my grandmother with a Christian woman, and he paid her. And what he claimed was, she was hiding was in a hole in the ground where they kept like potatoes and onions over the winter so it shouldn’t go rotten, you know, they didn’t have fridges in those days yet, so that’s where she sat with her mother, day after day after day. And unfortunately she contracted a --
Q: Tuberculosis?
A: Tuberculosis, yes. It started with like emphysema, and you know, they didn’t have antibiotics and the conditions were horrible and so forth. And then she developed TB and she passed away. If she would not have contracted TB, she would probably survived.
Q: And your grandmother?
A: And unfortunately when she died in ’42, the Christian lady just chased my grandmother out, she said, I don’t want to keep this old lady, out. And she ended up in one of the concentration camps, and you know the end of it is, you know, death.
Q: Mm-hm, mm-hm.
A: Um --
Q: Boryslaw is near what big city? Is it --
A: It’s near Lvov.
Q: Mm-hm, okay.
A: Drohobycz. In that vicinity.
Q: Yeah.
A: It’s called Doylni slonsk.
Q: Mm-hm, okay.
A: And apparently there was a big Jewish commun -- I mean, I don’t know how big, but it was a r -- a relatively large Jewish community there. And Boryslaw was known for having oil -- oil. So, you know, they were digging for oil and they found oil in Boryslaw, so they had, you know, those --
Q: Derricks?
A: Yes, right there, right.
Q: So now it’s the end of the war and your father comes to get you.
A: Yeah. What my father said, that during the time of the war, when he managed to escape each time there was an aksia --
Q: Right.
A: -- and one time he was even caught and he ran away from -- managed to escape the camp. He used to come periodically to visit me at that village, but I was not supposed to know that he was my father and they gave him a nickname like Chapchuss. You know, whatever, that means nothing. It’s -- it’s, you know, it’s like a blabber word, whatever. So whenever they said oh, Chapchuss is coming to see you. Because in case, if one of the neighbors or Germans would come in, I may say, aw, Marek Wein -- whatever. In order not to have that, he was called Chapchuss. So, that was the name.
Q: What was your new name during the war?
A: Oh, my name was Anna Theresa Beitsko.
Q: And that was the name of the family?
A: And apparently that was their name, yes. I was also baptized, by the way. I was taken to church as a baby and baptized. So it shows you, I must have been a couple months old, you know. I don’t know, four or five, something like that. I was baptized and I was their child. Now, after the war, when the war ended, they maybe thought that nobody will survive, cause my mom died, grandma was taken into a concentration camp. They thought my father, who knows, he probably won’t survive either. But he did, and so immediately after the war, a law came out in Poland that if there is a parent and there is a child that survived, they have to be united. So that’s what happened. He came and -- and me -- remarried immediately after the war and came to claim me. From what he said, they didn’t want to give me up, cause they already raised me and I was three and a half, and they ran away, he claimed with me, and they hid someplace. But eventually, you know, the police -- the Polish police, which was, I think, called Enkavide and the Russian police too, together came and they said you -- that’s it, you must return the child. He is the rightful father and, you know. And that’s it. And I remember the journey on a truck, in the back of a truck, we were sitting on a truck and my father bought me this huge bear, which wasn't so huge, but it -- in my eyes it was huge and it made moo each time you turned it, and I was petrified. I was so scared of that bear. On the other hand I also got a doll, you know, and that’s it. And then we rode on the track to a city called Lignice and we settled there for awhile. There were lots of Russians. I de -- remember, because we lived there already for almost a year, or maybe even a year and a half. So now I started having memories of that place. My father opened a shop, like a deli place and --
Q: Tell me a little bit who your stepmother was.
A: My step-mom is also a survivor. Her name was Clara Bardah from Chelm. She was one of six children. They were five sisters and one brother, and her parents both, Sela -- and I forgot the grandfather’s name.
Q: What was her last name? Her mai --
A: Bardah.
Q: So her --
A: Her -- her --
Q: -- maiden name?
A: -- I -- Morgenstern. Her maiden name -- grandmothers -- my step-grandmother, her name was Tela Morgenstern, from Chelm, but then she married, I think his name was Wolfe. This -- her husband’s name, last name was Wolfe, but the first name I don’t remember calling him grandpa, but not by the first name.
Q: So your stepmother’s maiden name was Wolfe? Her father’s name?
A: Yeah, yes, yes.
Q: And from Boryslaw also?
A: From Drohobycz.
Q: Oh.
A: Which was a relatively [indecipherable] she was not from Boryslaw.
Q: Okay.
A: From Drohobycz.
Q: Okay. And now you’re in this new town with her -- with them --
A: With -- with them --
Q: -- the three of you.
A: Three of us, correct. And I remember our -- they rented an apartment, a big apartment because my step-mom survived, and her sisters survived, five sisters.
Q: Had she been in a camp, your stepmother?
A: No, no, my step-mom, they all managed to get false papers that they are Christians. They all had, except one sister, all had blue eyes. They tied -- you know, they color their hair blonde and they resemble the Irish race, let’s put it that way, yeah. This was arranged by one -- from what I learned, what they told me, by one Christian man who worked in the government, who fell in love with one of the sisters. And they were very pretty, that’s true, they were beautiful women. Three of them were really gorgeous cause I remember them when they, you know, moved to Israel and so forth, so they were very attractive at that time, too. So I can imagine when they were young, they were probably very attractive. And he managed to arrange for all the five of th -- four of them to be -- the fifth one could not, because the fifth one was beautiful, but dark hair, brown eyes. You know, she did not look like an --
Q: Ar-Aryan.
A: Aryan, yes. Like the Aryan race, whatever. So with her was a different story. So -- but they worked in a lot of German families as housekeepers.
Q: Mm-hm, mm-hm.
A: And she used to tell us -- she used to tell me, my stepmother it was nerve-wracking, pretending what you are not and acting what you are not and -- and -- you know, and -- so that’s how they survived. Now, my grandfather, my step-grandfather, who in Poland, interesting was -- owned farmland. Not that he himself farmed it, but he was a farmer, basically, and that was a little bit unusual for Jews at that time to owe -- own land and be a farmer. But he did, he had a lot of land and you know, they grew potatoes and -- and whatever farmers did grow in those days and he had people who worked on the land. But with hi -- he was very religious. He used to pray three times a day with the Tefillin and all that. And during the war it was very difficult to hide them. So -- but they survived. They said that in the apartment they used to rip off the floor and there was like a sub-floor. And whenever there was an aksia coming, you know, that the Germans are coming to search for Jews, they used to hide them in there, they used to lay flat, board it again, put that carpet on, you know, and they had to lie there quietly, not a peep out of their mouth til the period of the aksia, you know, when -- then at night maybe they lift it up so they could go to the bathroom or whatever. So that’s -- that’s -- that’s basically how they survived. Now, her brother was drafted into the army and sent to the Russian border and he perished there.
Q: So now the three of you, as we said, are in this [indecipherable]
A: In -- in Lignice.
Q: And -- and what are your first memories of that?
A: Well, the fact that my father opened a store, I remember, and I remember Russian soldiers coming in. And in fact I remember there was a toilet and the Russian opened the door. They didn’t know what that looked, looked like a sink and they started washing themselves in that toilet. I remember that. I remember even seeing the Russian soldier and I asked my father how come they don’t have shoes on. Some of them came, and that was after the war, they had no shoes. They had their feet wrapped with cloth and with, like blankets and tied with a rope and I looked at that, it looked horrible to me because it looked like, you know, something in outer spa -- not normal. Not normal for a child because I already had shoes on and my father had shoes on and here are coming those poor soldiers, you know, and they looked dreadful. I remember that. I also remember not a very pleasant episode in that apartment that we stayed. And apparently there was a hospital not far from there. One night I remember screaming and yelling in Polish, ratumko, and ratumko means save us, save us, save us. Apparently some Russian soldiers, drunk soldiers came into the apartment and started beating on the door. And I remember waking up and opening the door and seeing blood on the door. And I was rushed in very quickly by my step-mom, quickly into the room and I don’t know, I think I hid under the bed from fear or what have you. And that’s it, that’s what I remember.
End of Tape One, Side A Beginning Tape One, Side B
A: -- member having a housekeeper in -- in Lignice. She was German, they hired her. And her name was Gertruda. Gertrude.
Q: So your father and stepmother had really nothing against the Germans, as such, they hired this German woman.
A: I don’t know. My father felt well, now you as a German -- that’s what he said, I said, why did -- at one point, you know, when I was older, I questioned that and he said well, that was my revenge. Now she’s gonna work for us. That was his interpretation, or his revenge. She was going to be the housekeeper and she was going to work for us. And I remember her in the kitchen doing the noodles, you know, the old kind where you roll -- made the dough, you rolled it out, and I was watching how she was cutting it into strips. What else? You know, I -- apparently she must have taken care of me. I don’t remember much of a relationship with her.
Q: But wi -- talking about relationships, what was your relationship with your stepmother? What did you call her, first of all?
A: Well, I called her Mama.
Q: Yeah, and --
A: She was -- you know, I was told that she is my mother. Now, I must have gone through some traumatic experience because I called her Mama, but I apparently didn’t attach myself to her yet as a mama. So I don’t remember too much as -- you know, of -- of -- kind of a n -- nurturing time with her. This I don’t remember, really. There wasn’t such a nurturing time. Maybe Gertrude was supposed to fill it in, but she -- you know, she didn’t. So, you know, I -- I’m sure that my physical taking care was taken care of, you know, making sure that I was fed and making sure that I was dressed and combed and bathed or whatever it is, but I really don’t remember sitting and -- you know, and -- and listening to a story or playing some games. Stuff like that I don’t remember.
Q: What kind of neighborhood did you and your family live in after the war? Was it a Jewish neighborhood, were there many Jews there?
A: I was -- in Lignice I was sent to a kindergarten, a Jewish kindergarten --
Q: So there were Jews that came back --
A: That came back and apparently settled there because en -- there was a kindergarten there, apparently, because I went to that kindergarten. In fact, I have a little picture of us being on the stage and performing something for Hanukkah. You know, like a song or something, which I have it, and so --
Q: Do you remember -- again, you were very young, any experiences in those early years after the war, of any anti-Semitism?
A: Yes, later on.
Q: Later on, okay.
A: Later on, yes, when we moved from Lignice to another city called Swidnica.
Q: Okay, we’ll talk about that, let’s finish --
A: Yeah.
Q: -- with Lignice.
A: Yeah.
Q: So you went to school, and you had Jewish friends.
A: And -- and apparently I had some Jewish friends, which I really don’t remember much. Course, I don’t know, it was -- you know --
Q: You were still very young.
A: -- young, and I don’t know whether parents invited kids over like we do today.
Q: Right.
A: I doubt it very much, and those parents that survived after the war, you know, life wasn’t easy for them, so who knows how much patience they had to take somebody else in the house an-and be, you know, attentive to them and play with them, or whatever. I know I di -- I had a lot of toys. They bought me a lot of toys after the war.
Q: Did you have any contact, do you know, with that couple that raised you the first three years?
A: No, no, because -- no, because I was told that she is my real mom, my step-mom was my mother. You see, I was in -- it was inculcated into my brain that this is your mother and I am your father. This is your mother. Nothing about the past, that I was raised by a period of my life with a Christian family or that I had a birth mom. No, that was -- that was discovered much later.
Q: Okay.
A: When I was in, oh I would say 14 - 15. I was suspicious already that something is not right, but that was years after.
Q: Yeah, right, later. Did you call the woman who hid you Mama, do you know?
A: I have no -- possibly.
Q: Probably --
A: Probably, yes.
Q: Probably, yeah. So now you’re asked to call another person Mama.
A: Mama, yes.
Q: Right.
A: Yes, yes, yes.
Q: Yeah. So you were there for -- in Lignice for a year.
A: I think it may be a year and a half --
Q: And you went to school.
A: -- two, could be. Maybe even two years, close to two years.
Q: Mm-hm, mm-hm.
A: And then we moved, and I went there to the -- to the kindergarten.
Q: Right. But your father was not religious --
A: No.
Q: -- so you didn’t have any -- did you observe -- again, you were so young -- any holidays, or Shabbat, or nothing?
A: No, not that I remember.
Q: Was your fath -- do -- do you know if your father was Zionist, a Zionist?
A: No. No, he was not.
Q: He was not, okay.
A: No. He was a Polish pat-patriot. He was very into -- he was a Polish patriot. He loved Poland. He had opportunity to leave.
Q: Well that was going to be my next question.
A: Yeah, but he did not. His cousin, his first cousin left in 1939 and came to Washington, and that’s how we ended up in Washington, through the first cousin. But my father, no, he didn't want to leave Poland.
Q: Okay.
A: And he didn’t want to leave his parents, you know, your commitment to the family, so forth. And maybe also my father was not that adventurous to move, you know, from different languages, you have to start all over. He just didn’t -- he wasn’t willing to do that.
Q: Now why did they move to a new -- another city? Why did you leave Lignice?
A: I think because -- my feeling -- he never said that, but that was my feeling, since he lived with the sisters and their husbands and my mother with a big family, and I don’t know whether he was planning to advance himself in the business area, whatever. He decided he’s moving away. So he moved to Swidnica.
Q: And where was that in relation to Lignice?
