United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with William Kisielewski
November 8, 2008
RG-50.030*0554 PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a recorded interview with William Kisielewski, conducted by Stephanie Blyskal on November 8, 2008 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview took place in Alexandria, VA and is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
WILLIAM KISIELEWSKIPRIVATE
November 8, 2008
Question: This is the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum interview with William Kisielewski, who is going to correct me if I’m wrong, conducted by Stephanie Blyskal on November 8th, 2008, in Alexandria, Virginia. Hello.
Answer: Hi, how are you?
Q: I’m well, how are you? Could you tell me when and where you were born?
A: I born in Warsaw, Poland, August the 31st, 1939, exactly one day before the aktion started.
Q: Yeah. And can you tell me a little bit about your family? What was your family like?
A: Well, I was a second grandchild of to – two large families. I mean, large – relatively large. There were four – four – four persons on each side. My father and two sisters and a – and a brother. And a widow grandma. And o – on my mother’s side, there was my mother, a sister and two brothers, and his mother – her mother, as well. There we go. S – that’s – I had – I – I – a sister who was six and a half years older than me, she born in 1933. And between us was another girl which – who bu – who passed away at the age of a year and a half. So I – I didn’t learn about her much, okay, that’s – and so, was a – was a big happiness, you know, first boy in the two families, but don’t ask me what for.
Q: Mm-hm. What did your parents do for a living?
A: Pardon me?
Q: What did your parents do for a living?
A: Well, my mother, she – her trade was to make ladies’ hats. And she had her – th – I think wa – the most select clientele in Warsaw, including the – the wife of the prime minister and people like this. She was very well known, which was working against her during that period of Nazis, and you know the persecution, so, you know, it’s good on one side, and depends what the times, can be working against.
Q: And what did your father do for a living?
A: He wa – he – he – he was a – a furrier, he cut furs. And he has a small store. That was what he was doing for a living.
Q: Mm-hm. And was your family very religious?
A: No.
Q: No?
A: My mother family was very progressive, not religious at all. And on my father’s side they were a little bit more conservative, but no religious. I wouldn’t call them as [indecipherable] religious.
Q: Did you celebrate holidays, or –
A: Oh yes, we – I understand. I don’t remember that, okay. I mean, they kept the – the – the – the main holidays and, you know, Sabbath and things like that, you know? They didn't ate s – kosher, you know, the strictly [indecipherable]. So that mara – more or less has give you the idea.
Q: Mm-hm. And what was your sister’s name?
A: Sophie.
Q: Sophie.
A: Sophie. And in the time of wa – when – when – you know, the w-war start and oh, the troubled times, Sophie was six and a half. And she – she remember, you know, the wealth and all the happiness pre – pre-war. So affect her much more than a – than affects me, because I was un – no conscience about my – my own existence
Q: Right.
A: [indecipherable] I did. On – on the age of two, two and a half already, or a little bit more, I don’t know, 19 – 1942, when the first transport of people have been taken from the Warsaw ghetto to extermination camp, in that – in that transport went my family; my – my – my parent – my – o-on both sides, for the exception of the – my – my mother’s brother, one of them have been killed. I don’t know if that’s by an accident or what, he be – was a fire on the roof in – in the ghetto. He went up to the roof, but never came back. He was 25. His name was Ignatius. And the youngest brother my – of my mother’s, Henry. He was 18 and he – he took poison, he killed himself. But he was in the underground, the organization, had been caught, so in order to avoid, you know, further consequences, he did that. I – Miriam, his younger sister, she had been taken to the – to the extermination camp with my – with my grandmother, who at that time was fift – 52 years old. And my mother was a widow on the age – age of 30. 30? Thir – 31 - 32.
Q: So, after the war started, what ha – what had happened to your family? Did they try to escape Warsaw, or –
