United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Renee Schiller
November 9, 2008
RG-50.030*0556 PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a recorded interview with Renee Schiller, conducted by Stephanie Blyskal on November 9, 2008 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview took place in Alexandria, VA and is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
RENEE SCHILLERPRIVATE
November 9, 2008
Question: This is the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum interview with Renee Schiller, by Stephanie Blyskal, on November 9th, 2008, in arling – in Alexandria, Virginia. Good morning.
Answer: Good morning.
Q: Thank you for joining us. Can you tell me where and when you were born, and what your name was at birth?
A: I was born in – in Horodenka, Poland, which is now the Ukraine, and I was born on April 25th, 1936.
Q: Mm-hm. And what was your name at birth?
A: Rena Koch.
Q: Okay. And what was your family like? What did your parents do for a living?
A: My father owned a textile store, my mother was with him in the business, and we had the housekeeper at home. And I had an older brother, who was four – four years older than I was, and we – basically, she took care of us at home.
Q: Was your family religious?
A: Well, my father went, you know, in – in Europe basically most people were religious, at least that’s what I was aware of.
Q: Mm-hm, right.
A: My father did go to temple, and prayed every morning and did go to temple on Saturdays. Of course, kept kosher. And I wasn’t really aware of that much more of what religious meant; I thought all Jews were religious.
Q: So you celebrated the holidays, and – and –
A: Yes, oh, definitely, this was part of –
Q: – and Shabbat, and –
A: – Shabbat, yeah, that was a-all part of life and I felt that that’s the way it has to be.
Q: So, how old were you when you s – did you start school where you –
A: I never started s –
Q: You never did.
A: – I never went to school until after we were liberated. So basically, at that point I was almost nine years old before I went to school, without knowing how to read or write.
Q: So, when the war started, you – you were on the Soviet side, or you were on the Polish side?
A: We were on the Polish side, and then the – the Soviets came in in – I guess in 1940, maybe, I think.
Q: Right.
