United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Edith Lowy
September 13, 2010
RG-50.030*0584 PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a recorded interview with Edith Lowy, conducted by Ina Navazelskis on September 13, 2010 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
EDITH LOWYPRIVATE
September 13, 2010
Question: Good morning.
Answer: Good morning.
Q: This is a United States Holocaust Memorial Museum interview with Edith Lowy. Did I pronounce your name properly?
A: Yes.
Q: Okay – on September 13th, 2010, conducted by Ina Navazelskis, and this is track one, and we’ll start, as we always do, at the beginning. Thank you for agreeing to see us, thank you for agreeing to meet and talk with us. I’d like to start, Mrs. Lowy, wi – like a fairy tale, at the beginning. When were you born; where were you born; who were your parents? Can you tell us a little bit about the world that you came to know from the very beginning?
A: My name is Edith Lowy. I was born Edi – Edita(ph) Pickova(ph), p-i –
Q: C-k?
A: The spelling, yes.
Q: Yeah, c.
A: Yeah, p-i – p-i-c-k-o-v-a.
Q: Okay. And where were you born?
A: And I was born in a very small coal mining community in Silesia. The name of the community was Lazy, l-a-z-y. And at the age of five, we moved to another small coal mining community, and – by the name Poruba, p-o-r-u-b-a.
Q: And what country was this?
A: Czechoslovakia.
Q: Was this north of Prague, south of Prague?
A: It was closer to the Polish border.
Q: I see, I see. And do you –
A: The closest large city was Ostrava.
Q: I see. Oh, yeah. And what was your first language?
A: My first language was Czech. My parents spoke Czech and German, so I was exposed to the German language also. Although people in the community, the coal miners, spoke their own language, which was a mixture of Czech and some Polish and my father really didn’t want us to speak it. My mother spoke because my parents had the general store, and the customers spoke – spoke this language. So my mother could easily speak with them, but my father refused, and we had to speak pure Czech.
Q: Well, it sounds like it was like a local patois, a local lingo.
A: Dialect, yeah.
Q: Yes.
A: Right. And –
Q: Did you have brothers and sisters?
A: I had a brother, two year – two years old – young – younger brother, Erik, e-r-i-k. As I said before, my parents had the general store. By the standard of the community, we were very well-to-do, but we were really not wealthy. We just – we lived on the main street, the street didn’t have a name, it – it was just a main street. On one side of our home was a baker, on the other side was a butcher. And we didn’t have very much to do with the butcher, but the butcher’s daughter was my closest friend.
Q: Were they Jewish, too?
A: No. I had no Jewish fr-friends at all at this time.
Q: Was there a Jewish community in this town?
A: There was a Jewish community, not in Poruba where we lived, but in a little bit larger community called Orlova, o-r-l-o-v-a, Orlova. And there was a beautiful synagogue and there was a large Jewish community. In my immediate community, only my grandfather, with his two daughter, who were n – daughters who were not married yet, they also had two general stores. Icar(ph), the neighbor’s – the baker’s daughter was my closest friend, and we are still friends. Actually I spoke to her a few – few days ago.
Q: That’s nice. That’s very nice that something can last so many decades.
A: So many decades, and so many different times when we didn’t know about each other. Where she didn’t – where sh – where she was afraid to have anything to do with me, under communists, you know, so –
Q: Yes. So tell me a little bit, how is it that your parents – your family came to be in this small coal mining town? How many – were they new to it, wer – had they been there for generations?
A: No, no, they lived there for a long time, my grandparents lived there for a long time. And as I said, nearby was a larger Jewish community.
Q: What – what do you know of your family history that your parents and grandparents might have told you about?
A: My – I was very close to my mother’s father, to my grandfather, because he lived in the same community. And my mother was the oldest of six girls, and one son. I was always told that my mother was the most intelligent of the six, although each one was very talented, each one had the special talent; music, painting, piano. Each one was very talented. But my mother liked books, and my father was from Moravia and he was very proud that he was born near the place where the beloved President Masaryk was born.
Q: Ah yes, ah, yes.
A: And –
Q: What was that place?
A: The name when he was born was called Strážnice – actually, Javornik. It’s rights here too.
Q: Hang on a second. Uh-huh, Javnice(ph).
A: Javornik. A –
Q: Javornik.
A: J-a-v-o-r-n-i-k, Javornik.
Q: Yeah. Exactly. And his name was Rudolf?
A: Rudolf Pick –
Q: And – and what was your mother’s name?
A: And my mother was – her name was Irena.
Q: That’s my mother’s name, too.
A: Yes?
Q: Mm-hm. Irena –
A: Irena Kornfeldova(ph).
Q: Kornfeldova(ph), uh-huh. And she was born in Poruba?
A: She was born in Poruba, right. And –
Q: Did your father attend university?
A: My father did not attend university, no.
Q: Was he a businessman?
A: He was a businessman, he was trained in Vienna in business, and my mother was much more interested in literature and – and education, although my father – also, both our parents were very, very concerned about our in – our education. And I remember my mother was dreaming to send us to Switzerland to get the good educa – rounded education.
Q: How did they meet?
A: I was told only few years ago, when I went to visit my cousin in Jerusalem, who adored my parents, she told me that they met through a traveling salesman. And then they fell in – I was told they fell in love with each other’s handwriting.
Q: That’s very romantic.
A: And my father – both my parents were in the – wonderful people. I have never seen anybody come of our home empty handed. Gypsies, who people resented and were afraid of, my parents always loaded with clothes and food and – and my mother all the – always taught me, give, and it will be given to you. Wish, and it will be wished out to you.
Q: Has it – has it fulfilled itself, this thing –
A: In most ways.
Q: Yeah?
A: Yes. But, as you know, with the fate they faced, life was not really as great and people were not as great, always.
Q: Yeah. We’ll come to that moment. What are your earliest memories?
A: So, my earliest memories o-of my parents are Mother sitting at the end of the day on the stove in the kitchen, after we went to bed, and when I went back to the kitchen, always she was sitting on the stove reading books.
Q: Did she work in the store?
A: Yes, both my parents work in the store, and we had a housekeeper, live-in housekeeper always. And the people in the community were wonderful people, honest people. And only when I came back after the war, I realized how much they loved and admired my parents. Only when I came back I really appreciated it.
Q: How – that’s – how did that show itself?
A: I will talk – tell you at the –
Q: Okay.
A: – end when we came back what happened.
Q: Okay, okay. And what are your – that – so your earliest memory of your mother is sitting that – is that she’s sitting on the stove reading a book.
A: Right, always reading. And my father was more outdoorsy. Both of my parents were very people oriented. Both loved people and people loved them, both of them. But my mother was quieter. As I said, intelligent, thoughtful. My father was more outdoorsy. He loved gardening and this I inherited from him. Also, my memories are of my mother singing a lot, and she sang a lot of Germans songs, operettas and – and I still remember them so well. Although, she sang nicely and I cannot carry the tune. And m – as – my best friend was Icar(ph) and we read the same books and we played with our dolls, and they had the double seat swing in the garden, two seats facing each other. And when we later moved into our home, I bought a swing like this, just because of the memories.
Q: So, what year were you born in?
A: I was born in 1928, December twent – 1928. And my brother Erik was born two years and two months later.
Q: So the years that you grew up were the 1930s, and you – and you grew up then, I would say in a – in a small town, small place, near – near the Polish border. And did political events make themselves felt at all?
A: Only in 1938
Q: What happened?
A: I never – I have to tell you that I never, ever heard the word anti-Semitism.
Q: That was going to be one of my questions.
A: Never, never. I was the only Jew in sport, I was the only Jew in school. I never, never felt anti-Semitism, until I came to Poland.
Q: What happened then, in the late – in 1938? Did –
A: Let me just tell you that my fondest memories are, on Sundays my – my mother’s sis-sister, the second oldest sister, which her mother was the closest, they had two children, and one was six months younger than my brother Erik. And on Sundays my father used to take the older son, Walter, and Erik, and me for a walk, and we walked to the ponds. And my father made whistles for us. In the meantime my mother cooked a very delicious lunch. And from the ponds, either we went to the – to Orlova, to the nearest community – there was a wonderful pastry shop, so my father bought pastries that we all like, especially my mother. Or we went to am – to a nursery. When they got – it was Mr. S-Slama(ph). Slama(ph) means straw.
Q: Mm-hm.
A: And I guess my love for nurseries is since then.
Q: Why are you –
A: So – and then in the afternoon, we used to go to my grandpa, who had a – most of my mother’s sisters and families came, and my grandpa pan – played cards with his sons-in-law, and we had our cousins and the neighborhood children, and my fa – my grandpa had the very nice garden, and many more flowers than we had. And my father took care of my grandpa’s garden. And behind the garden was a brook.
Q: Sounds ideal.
A: And geese, and a little bridge to a meadow, and I loved to go to the meadows and pick Lilies of the Valleys, and – and forget-me-nots. And it was very – a very pastoral setting behind my grandpa. So m – then, in 1938, the – the Germans took Sudetenland –
Q: Yeah.
A: – and the Polish army marched into our part of Silesia. And as Jews we had to vacate. I think they gave us a month to vacate. Now, to go in – deeper into Czechoslovakia, there was no reason to go because Germans already occupied part of it. So, we opted to go to Poland where my grandfather had a brother, a wonderful man. And we – we went to a smaller community near Kraków, Poland, and there we wanted to wait for the rest of the family because we – we knew that they all will have to eventually come.
Q: What was the name of this community, this place?
A: I-In?
Q: Near Kraków.
A: Prokocim, p-r-o-k-o-c-i-m, Proko –
Q: So when you had to vacate, did that mean you had to leave your store?
A: We had to leave the store, the home, everything. So I do not know, because I was not so interested in the arrangements, I was 10 years old in ’38, Erik was only eight when my parents made some kind of arrangement to give the house and the store. I don’t know if they rented it, or what the arrangement was, to some acquaintances of the baker’s family. My – my best friend’s family, with the understanding that if we come back, it will revert to us. So we left practically everything. When we came to Poland, my – my father couldn’t speak Polish, none of us could. But we kids learned quite fast, my father never could learn Polish.
Q: Did you see Polish soldiers in Poruba before you left?
A: No.
Q: Did you have any contact –
A: No.
Q: – with anybody Polish at all when – when you still –
A: When they occupied? No, it went very, very quickly. The army occupied and – very quickly. And my grandfather was gravely ill in this time. So I remember that they extended our stay, because Grandpa was dying, so we left after he died.
Q: I see.
A: In the beginning, in Poland – well, my – my mother’s sister, I mentioned her, with the two children, they arrived. And my mother’s younger sister, whom I always adored, she married just – just shortly before the outbreak of the war. And she married somebody, an engineer from Ostrava, the [indecipherable] city.
Q: Oh, okay.
A: And so we waited for them, and we lived together in a building I think we rented, an apartment. And for a few months, we were able to go to school, Erik and I, for a short time.
Q: What was that like? A: Of course, the language was Polish.
Q: Yeah.
A: So, it was not so easy.
Q: What – what are your memories from that school?
A: Not much.
Q: Not much.
A: Not much, because it was very short.
Q: Did you remember saying goodbye to your best friend before leaving?
A: Yeah, of course, you know, it was very sad to leave everything we loved. And then, in September ’39, Poland was occupied, and people were afraid of the – of the German army, and many people ran. Whatever – packed whatever they could carry with them, and ran away from the – away from the army.
Q: Do you mean Jews and Poles as well?
A: Yes, but mostly Jews were frightened. So, we packed our belongings and my mother’s youngest sister, with her young husband, and my family went on a run. We call it in Polish nowa(ph) chechken(ph), now on – on the run. In the meantime, my mother’s other sister, the one with the two children, went back to Slovakia, because Slovakia was still at peace at this time, and he, her husband was Slovak, so they went to Slovakia. And we went on the run with my mother’s cousin also. And it was a terrible time, because the planes were coming, and we were so tired, carrying our belongings. When the planes came we just hopped into some ditches, and I guess my parents had some money to buy food. But it was very hard for them to see us kids to walk and walk and walk and not having a place to rest or wash up. So eventually my father decided to talk to a Polish – a farmer, and ask him to sell us two horses and a buggy.
Q: And did he?
A: And he did, because he thought, better to get some money now, than if the Germans will come and cos – confiscate this, I’ll get nothing. So he sold us two horses. The horses became members of our family. We just – we loved the horses.
Q: How did you know that? Did your father say that he was – that this is what the farmer told him? Or, you just supposed that this is – he was –
A: I don’t know.
Q: You don’t.
A: I don’t know, but I – my – my father ma – might have mentioned something. So after we bought the horses, it was much, much easier. We could rest, we could –
Q: Right.
A: – just very different.
Q: Do you know what direction you were going in?
A: Toward the Russian front. And I remember that one time we were – we had to cross a river, and the horses got stuck in the river, and we had to unpack some of the load, and we had to get up – out and push –
Q: The buggy.
A: – the buggy. But we managed. And then, after – and I don’t know how – how long we were out around. I don’t know exactly how long [indecipherable]. But again, my father convince another farmer to take us to work for him. Then my father and my uncle were work with the horses on the field. My mother and my aunt were whatever needs to be done around the house.
Q: For someone who doesn’t speak Polish, he was very, very good.
A: He was – he was good, he could communicate. And ma – my mother could a little bit better with her – what she was talking to the peasants – to the coal miners. And so the farmer took us, and Erik and I took care of the cows, and I learned very well how to milk cows. And again, I don’t know exactly how long we were there. And then the Germans occupied Poland, and we decided, you know, let’s go back home.
Q: Wa – wa – during this time you were with the Polish farmer, did you have any interaction with them? Do you have any memories of them?
A: I just – of the cows, of the fields –
Q: Just of the cows.
A: – of the fields. But I have no idea what the grown-ups were talking of.
Q: Where did you sleep?
A: I guess we had rooms. I don’t have exac – exact recollection of this. I just remember the fields and sitting in and milking the cows. And then we came home, and my father couldn’t get any job. My uncle also, he was an engineer, but Jews couldn’t get easily job. So, the horses, Fuksa(ph) and Malutki(ph) –
Q: Fuksa(ph) and Marlutki(ph).
A: Futka(ph) – Malutki(ph) means a little one. And Fuksa(ph) was a beautiful horse. Malutki(ph) was the older hors – horse. But me – we adored the horses. And so they were moving furniture and whatever people needed to move, and that’s how they found money.
Q: Money.
A: And then, suddenly – suddenly laws started appearing. Restrich – reks – restrictions. One day signs appeared, Jews cannot go to stores, Jews and dogs not allowed.
Q: Can I interrupt just for a second? You returned home, but you didn’t get your store back?
A: No, not home. Home to Poland. When we went to this –
Q: Home to – oh, I see, not – not –
A: – not to the Czech re –
Q: Not to the Czech Republic –
A: – no, no, home.
Q: – you went back to –
A: To via – to Prokocim.
Q: Cro – Prokocim.
A: Near Kraków.
Q: Okay, mm-hm.
A: Right, right. And, so signs started appearing. Next day, Jews were not allowed to go to places or – en-entertainment, or swimming pools and movies.
Q: And you saw these signs?
A: The signs, yeah, every day we woke up to something new. Then Jews were not allowed to use public transportation. And then Jews were not allowed to use – to leave the community they lived in, even when grandparents – like in Baltimore we couldn’t visit the grandparents, because we couldn’t leave Silver Spring. And then finally Jews had to wear the bands, which I am just making because I am supposed to be speaking in a church next week, and I lost my band with the blue star. White band with blue star. Wh-When – and then Jews – Jewish children were not allowed to go to school any more. And of course, you know, the Jewish professionals were not able to – to – to practice their professions. But, it was very difficult to see all my friends going to school, all my friends going – being able to go on trains or buses, and –
Q: And you couldn’t.
A: – and – and we couldn’t. We went – w – I couldn’t leave my community, I couldn’t go on a bus, I couldn’t go anywhere.
Q: Did you notice any change in your parents and how their manner was?
A: Frightened. I could – I could see the fear in them, I could see – and they started – I heard – I heard them to debate, where can we, how can we escape, where can we go? And one – one day it was England, next it was Bolivia, next time it was some other country. Who will accept us? In the end we were trapped in the worst possible place.
Q: You had Czech citizenship, yes?
A: Yes.
Q: Czech-Slovak citizenship?
A: Right, right.
Q: Did that matter by the – by that point?
A: I don’t –
Q: No.
A: Matters that we were Jews, that’s what mattered.
Q: And why would you say it was the worst possible place?
A: Because Poland was the worst possible place. One day I was walking with my brother, and my cousin, who had beautiful blonde hair. He was eight years old – he was nine – nine, close to 10, my – Erik also, and I was 12. I was so proud at this time that I could wear the – the white band. I was – I felt so grown up. I can wear it, Erik cannot, he was not yet 10 years old. So one day we went for a walk and a Polish teenager approached us, lit a match, and threw it into my cousin Walter’s beautiful blonde hair. I felt so responsible, I was the older – I was terrified. I put out the – the fire from his – and we ran home, and from this day on, I was terrified to wear this white band.
Q: Was this the first time you saw an – you felt anti-Semitism from Poland – from Poles.
A: That was – maybe one time before. I had the Christian friend who took me to church once with her, and I heard some people making some anti-Semitic comments, and that was the first time. And then the first really shocking experience was when men, age I think 16 to 65, if I recall it correctly, had to assemble on an assembly place somewhere. My father and my uncle were in there and we all went with him, and we waited there all day. We brought him some food, and we didn’t know what’s going to happen. In the evening they were loaded on trucks and taking away. We had no idea where they went. I forgot to tell also, that during the time when my father was working with the horses and moving furniture, we had the neighbor, also in Poland, a butcher neighbor. And he suggested to my father and my uncle, they should go with him out of town to buy illegal meat, so he could sell it. And my father wanted so desperately for the family to have something to live on, that they agreed to do it. And they went, first of all, they were supposed to wear the bands, which they didn’t. They were not allowed to leave the community.
Q: And they did.
A: And they did. Second – and thirdly, they were bringing in illegal meat. So, there were dangers on so many side. When they – from the minute they left until they came home, we were – this I remember so vividly, we were so afraid for their lives. When –
Q: Had you seen anyone – I’m sorry to interrupt you – have you seen anyone at that point, murdered? Or had you seen any corpses, or had you heard any stories?
A: No, no, not at this time. Not at this time. It was just this terrible fear that if he would be caught, he would be shot. There’s no question, you know, this fear. So, they went and when they were suppo – we knew approximately when they will be back, usually it was at night they were coming back. So we took turns waiting on the street to listen if they are coming, and when we heard the horses from far, it was such a relief. And they went – when they came home, they were s – frozen, literally. The people and the – and the horses, everything was frozen, everything.
Q: So you meant – it was wintertime when they had done –
A: It was wintertime and when – I remember my – when my mother was taking my father’s socks off, it was all ice, all ice. It was a terrible time for them. Anyway, so my father was taken away on trucks, and we didn’t know when they will come back, if they will come back. Few days later, they did come back, and told us that they are working – I forgot also to s – to mention that when we came back after this running, we were put into ghettos. So we moved from Prokocim to Wieliczka, which was a well known city in Poland, to a ghetto. When my father was taken to this – on trucks, and when he came back, he said that they are working on the railroad tracks in Prokocim, where we used to live. So, they must have gotten permission to come on train, because otherwise they wen – would not have been able to – to come. So, one day they came home and they said that they heard that Jews from Wieliczka will be deported. It sounded sad, but we still didn’t know what deported means, and –
Q: So they were able to come back and forth afterwards?
A: In – right, in the evening. And they decided that first they have to save the kids, so first Erik and me. We couldn't go all together, because a big group would –
Q: Be most –
A: – be too dangerous. So they decided one night, the kids are going, so we walked the whole night until at dawn we came to my father’s – to the railroad tracks where Father was working, and my father hid us under a boxcar. He must have been sure that this boxcar will not go anywhere. We were supposed to stay under the boxcar, not to move, not to talk, not to whisper, until e – the evening, when my father would take us out and take us into hiding. Well, I can, as a parent, I can imagine what it must have been for my father having us under the boxcar, and my brother was a very big rascal, so – very, very. And my father came, they took us into hiding to a Polish family. And the next day they went to get Mother and my Aunt Polly. My mother decided that she has still some things to put in order and that nothing can happen so fast. My aunt should go and she promised she will come the next day. My aunt, of course, didn't want to leave my mother, but in the end my mother convinced her go, I am surely going to come the next day. The following day was too late. They already – my – my father and uncle heard from some Germans who were in charge and liked my father and my uncle that Jews from Wieliczka are already being loaded on trains. My uncle somehow managed to convince the Germans to – to come with him and bring some – some papers that Mother is needed to work in the kitchen on the railroad tracks. But they went to the trains, but they could not find her. Well, when we heard that Mother was taken, we were devastated, absolutely devastated. The only thing we thought, well, maybe she went to another camp, maybe the war will be over next week, and we will see her again.
Q: But this all was in 1939 - 1940?
A: Yeah, that’s not – 1940 - ’41.
Q: 1940 – ’41, mm-hm.
A: [indecipherable] ’41, into ’42. Into ’42.
Q: So do you remember – excuse me for emphasizing this, but do you remember the date your mother was taken?
A: It was summer. Summer of – the only date – well, I remember only one date, and I will talk about it.
Q: Okay. So this – so you know it was –
A: So –
Q: – summertime, and it was either 1940 or 19 –
A: It was June or July.
Q: Okay, June or July, ’40 or ’41?
A: ’42.
Q: ’42?
A: Already.
Q: Uh-huh, all right, so you had already been in Poland for a good many years, actually, you know, ’42 you’d been –
A: Right.
Q: – from 1938, when the Poles [indecipherable]
A: Well, we went in a ghetto in, we’re not [indecipherable]. And, so my – we were together, and my – we were hiding in three different places, one was – I don’t want to talk so much – one was on a roof and it was diagonally from a police station, and it was in the city where we used to live, so people knew us. So my father and uncle used to come in the evening, take off their bands, and always watching at night so nobody would see them.
Q: Were you like in the attic area?
A: In the attic area. Another place was we were in a mai – on a main street, then one night there was banging on the door, and we thought where somebody reported us, but it happened that it was an accident between a motorcycle and a car, and they were calling for help, so they were banging on the door. But everything was so frightening, because – and then, the third place was the most unusual. The third place, the Germans who liked my father and my uncle, offered that we can hide in the storage room of the building where the German and Polish offices – officers were, in the cellar.
Q: These were German soldiers?
A: N-N-No, German – I don’t think they were Nazis, they were German overseers on the railroad tracks, and –
Q: So they weren’t part of the –
A: – officer –
Q: – military, but they were part of the work force?
A: They were not military, but they were – right, not military. But I don’t think that they were SS. I – they might have been. They might have been, but I am not sure. So they offered we can hide in the cellar. The cellar, all that was in the cellar were crates, huge crates like from some machines. And the entrance to this was from the front of the building. No windows. No windows that – down to the cellar. So, we didn’t know what weather was outside, we didn’t know anything. The only people that knew that we are there, were our Polish neighbors, former Polish neighbor and I’m also forgot-got to tell you that my parents were so desperate to get Erik and me out when there was so much fear that we’ll be deported, or whatever, that the Polish neighbors send once their son, in the early 20s to bring Erik and me to their house to hide. It was before we were hiding in the other places. Wer – he came, and we were sitting on the train, Erik and I already, with this Polish guy, when I decided I’m not going anywhere with my parent – without my parents. So I ran out of the train, of course, Erik a – behind me, and the guy behind me, and my parents were very, very distraught that here – again we are here in danger, that we didn’t go into hiding. So, the only people that knew that we are hiding there were the Polish family, and two priests from a nearby church. And once in awhile they used to bring something and hide in the shrubs, soups, coffee, you know, in the shrubs. So, my par – my father or uncle took it out from under the shrubs at night. At night people were not working in this building, you know. But –
Q: Tell me, the uncle, this was the husband of your –
A: Of my mother’s –
Q: – of you –
A: – younger sister.
Q: – ya – sister, mm-hm.
A: I adored both of them, but my aunt was always my favorite aunt. So, we were – I don’t know again how long we were in this, but it was very frightening. We had some bottles to urinate in, in one of the crates, and every time we heard – and it was quite often – Polish or – or German voices in front, talking in front of the door, we jumped into the big crate, and we didn’t breathe.
Q: I’m a little surprised that Polish officers would have been allowed – you know, would have been cooperating with – with Germans, unless they were Polish police, for example –
A: Poli –
Q: – who were working for – because the military was – it was
A: No, these were Polish construction workers.
Q: Oh, I see, not military people.
A: No, no, they were construction. They were people who are working on the railroad tracks.
Q: I see, okay.
A: All the people in the building had something to do with building the tracks.
Q: I see, okay, okay.
A: Fine.
Q: All right.
A: But still, Poles were very anti-Semitic. If anybody would see my father going there at night, we would – we would have been finished. The priests were wonderful, and they offered to do Aryan paper for us. And we decided maybe that would be another possibility to save ourself. So somehow my father and my uncle obtained some hair dyeing solution. My aunt had beautiful black hair, bu – she was a very pretty woman, very pretty woman. My father and my uncle could have passed ano – as non-Jews. My uncle had blue eyes, blondish hair. My father also didn’t have Jewish features, yo-you know. But Erik and I and my aunt – so we decided, at least my aunt, when she dyes her hair, so it will be less risky. So they brought this solution, and I was – they went to work, my father and my uncle, and I was pouring this solution in her – into her hair, and rubbing it in, and rubbing it in, and she – it didn’t do anything. She said put more, put more, put more. So I was pouring more and rubbing in, and suddenly her hair was coming out in chunks. And sh – I could see that she was ready to scream in – you know, how painful it was, and her hair was burned, her skull was burned. And here I was a 12 year old kid, 13 year old kid, and I felt I did it to her, I did it to her. This – what could we do? Where could I ask what to do, you know, to ask for help? We couldn’t – she couldn’t scream –
Q: She was down in the ce – she was down in the cellar with you?
A: In the cellar, and we couldn’t – sh – sh – I could see the pain she was – she was really in excruciating pain. So, by the evening when they came back, her hair was gone, her beautiful hair was gone, and this was the end of Aryan paper. While we were there, we heard about a labor camp, Jewish labor camp, in walking distance actually, in Prokocim. So, I think the grow – grownups might have thought, well, it’s probably safer to survive in a ca – labor camp. Labor, it means working, so we will work, and the war will be probably – few months the war – war will be over. It’s surely safer than in the cellar, e-every moment was really fear, fear, fear. So we actually walked into the first labor camp.
Q: The four of you – the five of you?
A: The – the f – my – five of us, the five of us. Let –
Q: How did your aunt look? Excuse me, by that point, did she wear a kerchief on her head?
A: I – she must have some – somehow, yes, beca – but she was really very, very beautiful woman. So, when we found – it was scary to find ourselves behind fences, suddenly, not be – being trapped again, but we figured we will work, and I was working in the kitchen. I had to peel potatoes.
Q: Not a bad job.
A: No, not – not a bad job, but we had, I remember, seven buckets, big buckets to – to – of potatoes to peel, and there were big table with lots of potatoes, and the women were sitting around it, and everybody was grabbing the biggest potatoes, because it filled faster the bucket. We assumed that if we obey all the rules, we will live. The first – there was one room, it was a sewing room, and that was actually our meeting place where w – wife and husband, you know, the husband came to visit, the boyfriends came to visit, it was our – our community room. And one day we went sitting there in the evening when we heard terrible shots, and we froze, because we haven’t si-si – heard anything like it before. Nobody moved, until in the morning we heard that nine people tried to escape through the fence, and they were shot on the fence. The fence was, at this time, not electrified. So, that was the first shock. You better do what they tell you to do.
Q: Or not do anything else.
A: Anything else, right.
Q: Did you see those nine people?
A: I didn’t see them dead, no, but I knew them and it was – it was – the whole camp was, for the next few days it was – it was just a horrible, horrible atmosphere in the ca-camp. But at this – in this camp, Erik was there, I had some friends. My – I made friends with some teenagers my age.
Q: You were now 14 years old.
A: Right, 13 - 14, right. So, we met in the evening, and one of the boys who was suppose – supposing my boyfriend was – had a beautiful voice. So, he was singing, another was telling jokes. And I always wrote. I wrote poetry or stories on home life. So we met in the evening and we shared, either in song, memories from home, or my stories from home, and we were together still. But then one day, the camp was liquidated and we have – we had to move to another camp. Similar, also a labor camp.
Q: What was its name?
A: Pwa – Plaszów.
Q: Plaszów.
A: P-l-a-s-z-o-w. Under –
Q: Is this the camp where Amon Goeth was?
A: Near it.
Q: Near it, okay.
A: Ge-Goeth – Goeth we called – in camp we had Get, but Goeth.
Q: Goeth.
A: Goeth was in Plaszów concentration camp.
Q: And you were in the labor camp.
A: And I was in the Plaszów labor camp, which was in walking distance. But, again, we knew that as long as we obeyed the rules, we probably will live.
Q: And so your father, your uncle, your – your aunt, and your brother were there all together.
A: All together. And some of my friends.
Q: Okay. Now, did you – in these camps, did you live in the same – like, as families in a room, or were the men were separated –
A: No, no, no, men separate –
Q: – from the women.
A: – men were separate there then, and of course we – on the plank beds, which you see –
Q: Yes.
A: – in pictures, like sardines next to each other.
Q: Okay. So it could be – I’m sorry to interrupt, but it could be that things could happen during the day to a family member, and you wouldn’t find out –
A: No, no.
Q: – you wouldn’t know.
A: No.
Q: Okay.
A: So, in the – we moved to – to the labor camp Plaszów and in the group of my friends were siblings, brother and sister, Lola and Henyik(ph). Lola was my age, and Henyik(ph) was a little bit older and they had a younger brother Erik’s age, and they had an older brother who was a policeman, camp policeman, and they had a sister who also married shortly before that. So there were five kids from the same family, no parents. Parents were gone, just the kids.
Q: Wow. Can I interrupt just for a second? I hear noise outside. Can we close the doors here? Okay. Yeah, pause. All right, I’m so sorry.
A: It’s okay.
Q: You were talking – are we back on? Okay. We were talking about the five siblings whose parents weren’t there any more, who probably had been deported or – or lost somehow.
A: Right, right. One day, the policeman brother went with a group of prisoners who are working outside of the camp, went with them out of the camp, and either he bought, or somebody gave him a loaf of bread. And when he came to camp, they found it, and they shot him. So that was another –
Q: Shock.
A: – really shock for us, really, because he was such a wonderful young man. Such a wonderful young man. Also, another memory I have of this camp is that there was a young, married woman, Mrs. Unger – Ungar, u-n-g-a-r. Her husband was also in camp. And she became friendly – I guess she worked in the kitchen and became friendly with the cook. Friendly meaning human – a human being to a human being, nothing going on between them, just kind to each other. He was – and one night we were in beds when two or three of the Nazis came in and ask, is Mrs. Ungar here? And so she said yes. So they called her, they asked her, what is your name? And she said, Mathilda. And they said, Mathilda, ein schöner namen, a beautiful name. They took her with them, and they shot her. Just becau –
Q: Was the cook German?
A: The cook was a German person in the kitchen. That’s it, see? So these were the two instances in the camp that I vividly remember, and how they ca – ein schöner Mathilda. Always when I heard this name, Malthilda, ein schöner namen, a beautiful name. In this camp we heard of Plaszów concentration camp, and of Goeth.
Q: What did you hear?
A: We – I heard people say that they would rather die in this camp than go to this camp over there. I heard that this Goeth is a brutal – he is really a subhuman, you know, brute – very, very cruel. And – but the choice was not our made, and one day they liquidated Plaszów labor camp, and we had to walk to Plaszów camp.
Q: Oh my, oh my.
A: Erik was walking with my uncle and my dad. I was walking with my aunt in the women’s group. As soon as we reached the gates of Plaszów, they separated the children from the grownups. There was a lot of crying, a lot of screaming and begging and children didn’t want to leave, parents didn’t want to leave, and it was horrible. It was just absolutely horrible. And the –
Q: Was this 1943 already?
A: I-It was ni – yes, it was.
Q: So you were 15 and Erik was 13.
A: Erik was 12 actually. I was 14.
Q: 12, I see.
A: I was 14.
Q: That’s right –
A: Yeah.
Q: – because you were born in December, at the end of the year.
A: That’s right.
Q: Okay.
A: And so after lots of commotion and screaming and crying, the Germans said, the children will be going to separate barracks, and just simply, you know, pulled them away from the parents and with all the screaming, I didn’t know what was happening. I found myself in a huge room, with all the women, huge room.
Q: So you weren’t taken with the children?
A: Well, I didn’t know what was happ – I knew everybody was taken – I was in such a state of – of disbelief what’s happening. I found myself in this room with all the women, and there were big windows. And we were – the – the building was on a hill, and the women close to the window noticed that our men are below, in a barrack below, but there was a fence between us. So the women who were near the window were calling the names of the people whom they knew, you know, that we recognize some people, so there was a lot of calling, come here, you know, your father, your brother, whoever. And I don’t know how long it took til I – finally I was called, and my father was out. And all I s – oh, on the day when I found myself in the barrack, we heard terrible machine gun fire.
Q: This is in the concentration camp?
A: Yeah, in Plaszów –
Q: Already, so – yeah.
A: It’s already under Goeth. Terrible machine gun fire. When I heard this machine gun fire, I completely froze. I said, our poor children being killed? So when I came to the window, I ask my father, Erik? I just called Erik? And my father just did, you know, like I don’t know.
Q: I don’t know. So you succeeded in being taken with the women, but Erik was taken with the children.
A: Erik was taken – I didn't –
Q: No, you didn’t know.
A: – I didn't know.
Q: You didn’t know.
A: I didn’t know, I just ask my father and so he said, I don’t know. And – but I had this – this horrible feeling, this horrible premonition that they were our children who are being killed. The next day we were taken to work and we were carrying big, wooden boards, like for building barracks. Well, you can imagine, I was a small teenager. It was very difficult for me to carry the boards, and the camp was quite hilly. You know, up the hill, down the hill. And always when we were marching in the group, we were searching for people. I always for my father. Until the second day or third day, I don’t know exactly, because the whole thing is like a huge nightmare for me. Finally I saw my father’s group, and he was searching for me. So when we – they were walking opposite us, so he came to me and he grabbed me, and I could barely recognize my father. I could barely recognize him, he – something terrible happened to him, I knew. So, he –
Q: What did he look like?
A: – grabbed me, just – he age, I cannot tell you, beyond – beyond recognition. So, he grabbed me and held me, and I said, Erik? And he said, not here. That’s all he could say, and – and you know, we couldn’t talk, he had to leave. And a few days later, we were very short time in the camp, we were – we were again herded to the railroad station to be shipped somewhere else. And when we were standing at the railroad station, my father again managed to find me and came to me, and held me and said – pointed to a rock on a hill … and said, do you see this hill? That’s where Erik is. Only when we were in the other next camp, I found out that when they shot the children, they were covered with a little bit soil, but they selected 50 men to bury them, and my father was among them.
Q: Oh my.
A: And he – he could see Erik’s hand, cause he had the ring. So, from there – thank you – from there we went on our first train journey, and I don’t have to tell you what the trains were like, I’m sure you heard it from many people. Packed like sardines, people were crying, screaming, silent, disbelief, you know, we – resignation, well, you name every feeling. No place to go to the bathroom, I – when I think of it today, I think how humiliating it was, you know, to be – to urinate right there, the smell, the hunger, th-the thirst, everything. The fear. And at one point, they s – this train stopped and women at the teeny window could see that we were on some kind of field. And the Germans with their rifles came in, were banging on the – on the ra – on the car – on the train, you know.
Q: On the doors, or on the – yeah.
A: On the doors, banging and screaming, and then there were some shots, and we were thinking, is that it, where we are going to – to die? And always my thought, is my father still alive? So –
Q: Had you had any conversations with him – when everything started, and you were in Poland and things kept getting worse and worse and worse and worse, did he ever sit down or – did you have any – any discussions about what was going on, or did he try to keep it all inside so to spare –
A: My father?
Q: Yeah, to spare you any kind of fear?
A: He ti – he – he did try to hide a lot from me, a lot. But I could sense the pain. So, the youngest brother of – only Lola survive. The two of us were the only two children from the whole group that survived.
Q: From Lola and Henyik(ph) you mean?
A: Yeah. From Lola, and Henyik(ph) was on the men’s side –
Q: So –
A: – so I didn’t know what happened. But I heard that the younger brother, my brother’s age, was killed also. And when we were in the other camp, we heard that Erik was beaten because – we thought they shot him because he would beg, let me live, I will work. This is the only date I remember. November 15th.
Q: November 15th. … How old was he?
A: Between 11 and 12. This was the only time in my life that I wanted to die. The only time I wanted to die. But, I decided I have to live for my father. So, we went on the train, and the next stop was deeper in Poland. Georgie, it will take a long time. I’m sorry we had – have – yo-you didn’t go to the meeting yet, did you? Oh, you went already? Yeah? Okay, I think we – how long have been – we been talking now?
Q: A little over an hour. Over 70 minutes. 70 minutes.
A: Oh, it was to take a while – a little while.
A2: How long?
A: No, I’m just – I don’t know, another hour, hour and a half probably. I will have to –
Q: Thank you, thank you. I know it’s costing you.
