United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Eugene Lipman
February 8, 1990
RG-50.030*0135 PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a taped interview with Eugene Lipam, conducted on February 8, 1990 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
EUGENE LIPMAN
February 8, 1990
Q: Would you tell me your name please?
A: Eugene Lipman.
Q: And where and when were you born?
A: Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, October 13, 1919.
Q: Okay. Uh...Gene, tell me something about your family and growing up in Pittsburgh.
A: Uh...My father was a small jeweler in the mill district of Pittsburgh, my mother a Pittsburgher by the way. My father was born in Europe...uh...had and raised children and was the compliant homemaker. Uh...We never had any money. My grandparents,...uh...all four, lived in Pittsburgh until my grandfather, my paternal went off to Palestine. In 1925 or 6 came back for my Bar Mitzvah celebration, and then came back permanently during World War II because the idea of the Germans taking over Palestine was an unpleasant idea to him and so he came back and he died in Pittsburgh. We are a long lived family. My paternal grandfather was 93 at the time of his death. Uh...I grew up in this mill district of Pittsburgh to the age of 7, then moved to the ghetto of Squirrel Hill because I had to go to Hebrew and all the synagogues and Hebrew schools were in Squirrel Hill, and I completed my high school education at High School, 40 percent Jewish and...uh...finished in 1936, by which time I had already decided to be a Rabbi. And started the Pitt because I could live at home and go to Pitt. This was depression time. And then in 38...Solomon Freuhauf who was my mentor in this Rabbi business decided that I was wasting my time in Pittsburgh and sent me off to Cincinnati. I went to Hebrew College in Cincinnati and the University of Cincinnati at the same time. They were across the street from the other...from each other. They still are. And...uh...got my degree from University of Cincinnati, finished it HUC in 1943, having accelerated a year because they needed chaplains so badly. And...uh...so we went to school for 22 straight months in order to accomplish this. No professor would allow us to give up a course. How can you be a chaplain without my course in mid rush five, one of them was known to say. Uh...It was required by the military that you have a year of experience before you can go into chaplaincy, and so I replaced a Rabbi in Fort Worth, Texas, who went into the Navy and spent a very uncomfortable year there. I was 23 years old and everybody I met in the street 23 years old was in uniform. Uh...The entire American army was in Texas. And...uh...I was not in uniform so as soon as I could get into uniform, I got into uniform. Uh...We had married...in...1943, the day after ordination. It was a long weekend, and...uh...by the time I went into the military, Esther was pregnant with our first child.
Q: When and under...when did you go overseas. What were the circumstances?
A: Well, I had decided very early on that my war in World War II was the European theater, not the Pacific theatre, even though I wavered on that because of something I'll mention in a minute. But I had really decided that I wanted to go to Germany and I had asked the Chief Chaplain's office to ship me to Germany. Going overseas was unavoidable. I knew that. And so…uh...in February of 1945, I got orders to go overseas and didn't get there until April because that's the war the army worked. The...uh...thing I didn't mention to you was that while I was in Fort Worth, a member of my congregation who had rabbinical connections...uh. . asked me, right after Yom Kippur services, as a matter of fact, if I had ever thought about becoming a pilot. Uh...He taught fairy pilots, the women pilots.
Q: Excuse me. I want to hold it. And can you stop the tape please? Alright, just hold the tape for a minute and then we'll pick it up. We've had construction problems on the third floor. The sound is coming through the roof. Okay. These people are just marvelous. What we will do, we'll back it from the beginning of that story. I'll ask you to describe... Dean, tell me about...uh...the gentleman in Texas.
A: His name was Stanley Herst, and he had rabbinical connections. He came up to me after services on Yom Kippur and introduced himself. We had never met. I had been there all of about 4 weeks after all, and said that all his adult wanted to teach a Rabbi to fly and all Rabbis were chicken. And being 23, I wasn't having any of that and I said, "When do we start." And he said, "Tomorrow morning at 7 o'clock." And (laughter) I said, "No. I can't do it tomorrow. Give me a couple days." Because, among other things, I didn't have a flight jacket. And in those days, you had to wear a yellow jacket. You couldn't go up in an airplane. They were open. There were no closed airplanes. That's a long time ago. So he taught me to fly in his little piper cub which went 70 miles an hour maximum, and I notified the...uh...Jewish Welfare Board and the Chief Chaplain's office that I was doing this in case it was of interest. And the Chief Chaplain's office was very interested, they said. So I got my license and...uh...after Chaplain's school, which was 5 weeks we got our assignments and I was signed to the armored force. And I thought, you know, "Typical Army screw up!" But...uh...It was done deliberately. I found out that they just didn't want Chaplains flying airplanes. They wanted Chaplains praying for troops. And so I did go to Europe instead of doing Island hopping in the Pacific was what they had been talking about. So I arrived in Europe in...uh...April 1945. The...uh...voyage was of interest historically. I became the radio announcer on the plane...I.. . on the ship. I probably was the only one who could read English, something of the sort. And several times a day I did news broadcasts, which I had written from whatever material they could garner. Uh...Historically, I guess the most important thing I did was announce the death of Franklin Roosevelt...uh...who died while we were on our way overseas. That was a very discouraging and depressing...uh...idea. Who...who was Truman became a very important question to those of us who were on our way overseas. We also had a.. . uh... marathon bridge game going. It should be noted for historical record that nobody in my Army career ever suggested that we play bridge for money. Never did. There were eight of us in this bridge game and we cut in and cut out for all kinds of necessary purposes, like sleep. And...uh...I didn't get a good hand (laughing) in 14 days. Several million points were involved in my losses. Uh...I also agreed to...uh...box for the only time in my life, because they were having a series of boxing matches and they couldn't find a heavy weight to fight against this lieutenant who was crazy enough to volunteer, but he had fought a couple of times before. We sort of sparred around for three rounds. I.. . uh...developed a strep ear toward the end of the voyage and was taken by ambulance from dockside to an Evac hospital just outside Lahov in France. And the rumor went around that this guy I had fought against had beaten me up so badly that I had been hospitalized. And...uh...rumor also went around that I was being sent back home again because I was so sick. I heard that long after I got into Germany. Couple...couple of people were surprised to see me. I was in this hospital for 3 days. The hospital chaplain, who was bored out of his mind,...uh... stole a couple of bicycles and he and I peddled each night into this little village where he had met a French couple, and we played bridge in French, which was fun. Uh...Eventually, though, that had to stop and I had to get to work. So I.. . uh...was put onto a troop train headed for Germany. Typical 40 and 8 box car and I staked out my little piece of turf big enough for my pack and me, and then I was standing at the entrance to this box car waiting for the train to start and some sergeant was walking up and down yelling, "Who can talk French? Who knows some French?" So, one never volunteers, but he wasn't getting anybody and I said,...uh... "Will some French do?" And he says, "Three words will do. And Colonel needs a French translator." So I went back to the Colonel, an old regular Army man, obviously unsuccessful because he was in the transportation corps running these troop trains which didn't require much military skill. And he was delighted to see me, and I was moved into his car which was not a box car. It was a heated Pullman car and...uh...I lived very well for 5 days going into France. Uh...My job was every time the...uh... train stopped to tear up to the other end to the engineer and ask him what was wrong. And he told me, "Signal." (laughing) Every time, it was "Red Signal. I can't go." And I went back and told the Colonel who was quite content to go on doing whatever he was doing. I had lots of bad books to read. I had a fine, fine trip into Germany. Uh...wasn't wanted in Germany at that time. No one knew what to do with me. I was moved back to a town in Belgium called Verea, and...uh...as a casual. I did not have an assignment. And then V.E. day came, and we celebrated V.E. day by going from our camp which was outside Verea into Verea to watch the celebration and to celebrate. I was depressed. I didn't feel like celebrating. I don't know why. I.. . Probably because I was alone, and...uh...couldn't think of much to celebrate as a matter of fact. The world was over, but in the square in Verea, I saw some men and women in concentration camp uniforms. Clearly! Uh...I knew what they were, and they were standing over there, and I walked over toward them. They recognized my insignia and crowded around because I was the first American Jew that they had run into. They were Buchenwald graduates, and they were the first survivors of the Holocaust whom I met. Uh... They didn't want anything. I didn't have anything. Uh... But we talked, and...uh...they did a lot, my first concentration stories, my first Holocaust stories. They were followed by thousands more Holocaust stories over the course of the next 3 years. I did get an assignment to 22nd Corps Headquarters in the Rhineland. Our town was Hildan, not to far from Cologne, and I moved in. Large territory, all of the Rhineland, including Cologne. A lot of troops. Theoretically, we were conducting services for all those troops. I got a jeep and went to work. Early discovered that a lot of German Jews and a lot of East European Jews had come into the area not in displaced persons camps, but living on their own where they could find a place to live, which many of them could not do. So I began to do three things. First of all to push military government to find housing for them; second, to see that they got food because they had no source of income and they did not get UNRRA food because they were not in a UNRRA installation. And...uh...some clothing because they were still wearing concentration camp uniforms, and that was not a very good idea. Uh...So my services with American soldiers consisted of a gang coming together. There were about 10 of these a week, and my saying to them,...uh... "Anybody need to say cottage, ...uh...there was frequently somebody who needed to say cottage, so we had a short service cottage, and then I said, "Let's go. We need food. Let's go get it." And after the first time in each of these installations, anybody who could beg, borrow or steal a truck...uh...came with truck, and we went to army depots and we got food. Uh...Sometimes was able to sign for it. I have often had a nightmare about the army catching up with my memorandum receipts...uh...and they will some day. My great, great, great grandchildren may have a problem with the army...uh...I know that they catch up, because about 1947 or 48, my uncle who fought in France in World War I got a bill from the United States Army for $45 for a pistol that he had signed a memorandum receipt for in France, and had never turned in. ...Uh...Actually, he had turned it in, but the Army didn't think so. So he had a correspondence with the army for many, many moons about that money for the...I think this was all those years later...so someday... Most of the time, though, we didn't bother to sign for it. We just stole it. And there were millions of tons of supplies stashed in depots around the area and...uh...they should be used. And they were. We also managed to get hold of some kinds of clothing. Couldn't use uniforms, of course, but there was underwear. There were socks. There were shoes. There were jackets and things like that. So, we were starting a pretty good system going when orders came out moving us. Uh...The British were taking over our area. There had been negotiations and most of the Rhineland became British zone. And in typical army fashion we were moved as far as you could get, which was Plezn, Czechoslovakia. We packed up and we started across Germany. Before that happened...after we got the notice that the British were coming in and before we left, I decided that I better do something in this part of Germany that needed doing for me. I went to Dachau. Took a 3 day pass and took my jeep and went down to Dachau where Abe Klausner, my classmate, ...uh...was working fulltime, and Klausner's a story unto himself, and we'll probably get around to it in the course of this thing. Uh...My reaction to Dachau was what exactly what you would expect somebody's reaction to Dachau to be. There was still 30 odd thousand Jews there. Some were dying each day cause there was no way for them to make it. Most of them were going to live. They didn't look like they were going to live, but the Army medical people, who are very good by the way, said they were going to live. Abe was in the same business that I was in, only more so as he had this fine clothing for them. I remember the day that he got 38 thousand pairs of shoes out of a German Army warehouse just by going in, opening the doors, and taking them. And...uh...Every day he had people to bury. I.. . uh...often have said to people who are skeptical about the size of the Holocaust that if they would like me to step off approximately how many...uh...feet of space it takes in full directions to make a rectangle that would hold 70,000 dead Jews, I know how to do that because I have seen them. Uh...I stayed those 3 days with Abe and then went back. On the way to Czechoslovakia, we went through Buchenwald. And once and for all...uh...the myths got exploded that the Germans didn't know about concentration camps cause when we went into the marvelous old town of Yana, and into the wonderful former capitol of the German Republic of Weimar, I saw smoke. And I asked what it was, and those were the fires, not the...uh...crematorium fires, but the fires at the Buchenwald concentration camp where there were still people. You could see them. They were only 3, 4 miles away from each of those two towns. I have a funny feeling that when the wind blew the right...blew the right way during those years...uh...you could smell Buchenwald without any trouble. We got to Plzen, and I settled into my room, and to my office. Uh...Two things happened in fairly short order, one of which is...uh...just of historic interest. The other of which transformed my life. I'll do the easy one first. I got a phone call. It was the Bishop of Plzen, a Catholic Bishop who told me his name, which I don't remember. And I said to him, "Sir, I.. (You see he had some English)...that you want my Catholic colleague, Chaplain Straun," and he said, "No. You're the Rabbi, aren't you?" And I said, "Yes Sir." And he said, "You're the man I want to come to see, he said, "You don't have to come out here." It was a couple of miles from us to the center of town where the cathedral was. "I am coming down this evening. I'll stop in." And I went to see him. And I met for the first time a bishop who looked like a bishop. You know, the long robes, the pointed toes, shoes, the whole business, and he greeted me very warmly and said that he wanted to take me somewhere. Didn't want to explain too much, but that...uh...it will be a great relief to one of his parishioners if I would go with him. I said, "Alright," and we made a date for the next afternoon. We went into the old part of Plzen, which is centuries old. These wonderful 4 and 5 story apartment buildings, which looked like a slum on the outside and are often very nice on the inside, and I was introduced to a man named Snyder, an engineer, who told me the following story. In the building in which he lived, a neighbor had been...Rabbi Katz, the Rabbi of the congregation in Plzen. The synagogue, by the way, was still standing. We cleaned it out. It had been made a warehouse, of course, by the Germans, and it was rededicated and used by the Jews who happened to be in Plzen during that time. It may still be used. I have no idea. (Sigh) Rabbi Katz and Mr. Snyder, became very close friends because they both had an interest in French impressionist paintings, and they both collected what they could afford to collect. In 1938, when the Nazis came in, the Rabbi said to Snyder, "They are going to take our pictures because they want paintings. They steal paintings. Let's hide them. Snyder, being an engineer, was ingenious, and he took his living room which was 40 feet long, by the way. One of these European saloon-type rooms, and he built a fake wall 3 feet in from the regular wall, and that wall was covered with book shelves and other nice things, with one a typical spring door. He took me inside, and there were all the paintings which they had stashed away, both Rabbi Katz's and his. His agreement with Rabbi Katz was that, obviously, if Katz came back...uh...the paintings would be his...his paintings. If he did not come back, all the paintings would be Snyder's. Uh...He also left some books, and that's why the Bishop had taken me. His most precious books. Rabbi Katz was killed in Auschwitz, his whole family, so there was nobody to inherit either the paintings or the books. And I took the books at Snyder's request. An interesting group of 4, 5 books. Not his library, just the books he cared most about. One 2 volume set turns out to be precious. It's now in the rare book room of our seminary in Cincinnati. It's one of two copies of this 1520 Hebrew edition of one of the great classics... uh...in the whole world. The other one is at Oxford. Uh...There were some German poems, beautiful edition, which I gave to Sylvia. We'll come across Sylvia shortly, and...uh...a Hebrew New Testament, 17th Century, which I gave to the Bishop. And...uh...for myself, I kept and sent home an album of Visidor Kaufman, a prince. Visidor Kaufman was a fine classical Jewish painter of the beginning of the 20th century who was himself Austrian and got interested in East European types. And his paintings of East European Jews and East European scenes are classics. And...uh...I have been distributing those to friends, and I have one or two of them. That was my visit with the Bishop, and these books. The same day there was a knock on my door and a little woman walked in, in an American Red Cross uniform. Uh...Sylvia was maybe 5 feet tall, a skinny little thing, very good looking, about 10 years older than I, and she told me the following story. She was a social worker who had been part of the social work department at Steven Wise Free Synagogue, which was then just called Free Synagogue because Steven Wise was still living. And she had worked for Wise•, and told wonderful stories about Steven Wise. When America got into the war, he said to her, "You have to go into the Red Cross." And she said, "Why? To feed donuts to G.I.'s?" And he said, "Yes, because in Europe you are going to be in front line areas, and you are going to be able to help Jews. There will be survivors, and they are going to need all kinds of help and you're just the type to do it." He was right. She was just the type. She got into the Red Cross. She went to Europe, ...uh...opened one of the first concentration camps in France...uh...organized all of the little kids, and middle sized kids who survived, and that was the transport that went to Palestine legally...uh...after liberation. She landed in Czechoslovakia. I don't know how. And was the director of the Red Cross club in downtown Plzen. She had four other women working with her. And from early in the morning till 10 o'clock at night, she handed out donuts and coffee and talked and chatted with American soldiers. Then they closed up for the night, and they opened the back door and the Jews started to come in for all sorts of things. Uh...Sylvia asked me if I wanted to help Jews. Since that's why I went to Europe, I agreed "Yal," and...uh...asked her what was going on. She had been contacted by the Jewish Brigade group which was in Italy. They had been attached to the British army in Italy, had fought through the war, and at the end of the war were in town called Trevisio, way up in the Italian Alps. Immediately, they organized themselves to work with Jews and they sent ambulances and they sent trucks over the hills into Austria and they began to move Jews into Italy to get on ships, illegal of course, to go to Palestine, and would I help with this enterprise? We could send Jews from Czechoslovakia into Austria and the Brigade would pick them up and take them to Italy. That sounded like a very intriguing idea to a 25 year old kid. Cops and robbers! And so Sylvia and I organized a movement out of the American zone of Czechoslovakia. Actually, it was out of all of Czechoslovakia, because at that point the border between the American zone and the Russian zone was an open border. We were still friendly. We mutually declared the Cold War only in August of 1945. So I was given the 3rd language...uh...pass to go anywhere in Czechoslovakia I wanted to go for my purposes. And...uh...two things happened. First, Sylvia and I went over to Prague. There were 6,000 Jews in the Rothchild Hospital there without a place to go, and new people were coming in all the time. Some from Theresienstadt. First time I had heard of Theresienstadt. Others from further East coming West because they had no intentions of living in the East. Uh...Poland was not a place for Jews. Uh...They didn't want to live in Hungary. They didn't want to Czech. They didn't want to live in Europe. They wanted out. And they would come to a Jewish center hoping that somebody would have some ideas about how to get out. They were also looking for relatives...uh...a very important function. We'll talk about that some more when we come back to Abe Klausner. We organized...uh...a way for these Jews in the Rothchild Hospital to...uh...receive railroad passes to come into the city of Plzen. From Prague to Plzen is only about 40 or 50 miles. The only way to get there is by train. We then proceeded to type one at a time...uh...passes, authorizing this person a United Nation's Stateless Person to travel from Prague to Plzen for the purpose of looking for relatives. We looked around Plzen for the biggest stamp we could find. I haven't any idea what it was about, but we found one and got a little bunch of red stamp pads and we put big red stamps on this thing and signed the name of a non-existent American Colonel to this document. And...uh...We would collect them when the people came into Plzen and then take them back to Prague because I could travel. And...uh...leave them at our Headquarters, hospital and a new group would come. Uh...We wanted them to come a few at a time. We didn't want large groups taking over trains, so they came in every day. And they reported to us at the Red Cross Club after 10 o'clock at night, and we drove them out to the Karlov displaced persons camp which was just on the edge of Plzen. It was an UNRRA camp. We were able to do this because of a rather remarkable coincidence. I went out to the camp to meet the Director and see if we could make a deal for our people to spend some time in the camp. His name was Andrew C. Dunn, and when we met I said, "Tell me. Does the C stand for Carnegie? ," and he said, "How do you know?" I said, "Because anybody with named Dunn with the first name Andrew, the chances are fifty fifty that your middle name would be Carnegie, and you have to be from Pittsburgh." And he said, "Amazing." I said, "Yal, So am I." And we talked and he said, "Lipman. Lipman. Is your old man a jeweler?" And I said, "Yal." And he said, "I bought my wedding ring from him." His assistant, a woman named Fay Green, who many years later became his wife...uh...was intrigued by this whole business so he offered a five hundred in his camp. . We used for transportation to Austria and the answer was U.S. Army trucks. And who drove them? U.S. Army personnel. Why did they do it? Scotch. And some money. We did not want people doing us favors. We were commercial. Uh...We made a trip down to the Austrian border and made the discovery that the only bridge across the Danu...Australian River• that we knew about was a military bridge and we weren't about to use that. So we went down the road looking for a way to get across that blasted river, and we found one. It was an old dam no longer in use, but serviceable and was just wide enough at the top for an Army 6-pod• to get across with about 6 inches of play on each side. And that's the one we used. We went across the dam into Austria and found our way either to Lintz or to Gratz or to Saltsport, depending on whether the Brigade told us to bring this bunch of Jews. Others, it worked. But I have to tell you where we got the liquor because that involves one of my more favorite memories. I was entitled to a few bottles of Scotch a week as a.. . I was a Captain by then. That wasn't enough because we needed at least a dozen to 20 trucks or it wasn't worth taking the chance on the trip. Uh...One of the breaks we got by the way...lots of breaks in this...Massel is not to be considered a minor thing. The...uh...sergeant in charge of our motor pool at Corps Headquarters. Now Corps Headquarters has a lot of trucks. It just does. Uh...Corps a big thing. Was a sergeant named Katz, and he was from Brooklyn, and Sergeant Katz and I made a deal that he would get truck drivers for me and trucks and we would pay with money and Scotch. As I recall, it was 2 bottles per round trip or something like that. But where the Hell do you get Scotch in that kind of quantity? And I decided to take a real risk. I went to my senior chaplain, a Presbyterian from Kansas, Bird Colonel, full Colonel, but not regular army. He was a reservist. A very, quiet, pleasant man. He said to me, "You know, I haven't asked you any questions, but you travel a lot more than is comfortable for the Chief of Staff." Cause I was going to all the Jewish camps and communities and people I could find all over Czechoslovakia. I was also going to Theresienstadt by then. We haven't come to Theresienstadt yet. And he said...uh...Chief of Staff has asked...has asked me about this and I said I would investigate it." He said, "I can cover for you if I know where you are going. And you haven't any reason to tell me where you are going, but you will have to or I can't cover for you with the Chief of Staff," who is after all a 2-star General. I said, "Okay. I'll make a deal with you. When I leave each day, I will put under your blotter a statement of where I am going, from town to town to town each day, and then I'll give you my trip ticket. And you validate it if you chose to do so." He said, "Of course, I chose to do so. I know what you're doing and you got to do it." He did not know that we were taking Jews to Austria, but he knew I was working with Jewish displaced persons and he thought that was absolutely essential. Bless him, said I. He says, "Anything else I can do for you?" And I said, "Yal. You're a Bird Colonel. You get all the liquor you want, don't you?" He said, "I wouldn't know. I don't drink." I said, "I knew that, but you're about to." And he listened and he said a couple of people in supply are going to be awfully (laughing) surprised. I said, "You don't have to explain what you're doing with it. It's for charitable purposes that you getting into Protestant charities in Czechoslovakia which is your bound duty as a Christian." And he smiled and he thought that made sense, and I got all the liquor I wanted from then on, on his tab. Bless his heart. I was...I heard of his death in the early 50s, and I was very sorry. He was a good, good man. He saved my life, and saved Jews. That operation worked very well until August when...uh...we got caught in one of the Austria towns. Red handed! The whole bunch of us! We had not yet transferred these people to the Jewish Brigade...uh...and we got picked up. And I got terrible reaming from a General who announced me that he was going to radio my General immediately, and I would be court-martialed. And...uh...General Hubner did not court martial me. General Hubner, who was known as the little Patton, was a tough...uh...guy, but he wanted to get rid of Jews. He didn't want Jews in his territory. I have to tell you the Jewish displaced persons were the only displaced persons who were difficult. All other displaced persons, and there were 20 some nationalities of displaced persons...Outer Mongolians, for example, that the Germans imported for labor purposes. They were grateful for being alive, for being fed by UNRRA where they ate better than they had eaten most of their lives, and they were no hurry to go home. The Jews were not grateful. The Jews were in terrible conflict over being alive, over having survived. They didn't like anybody very much and...uh...they wanted out, and nobody would let them out. And so they caused more trouble than everybody else put together. Some of us understood it. We tried to organize it so that it wasn't too difficult. In addition, of course, we had all the internal Jewish problems that we always have. For example, within a month of liberation every Zionist party there was was in business, and they all wanted paper for publications and they all wanted everything. It was not easy. And these were not pleasant people at that point, and I think that should be understandable that they were not. So General Hubner• said, "Get them out of here. I don't care." He didn't tell me that, but that's how he behaved. One incident will illustrate this. He called Sylvia and me in one day. Now I had never met General Hubner. Uh...Captains don't monkey around much with 3-star generals. There are layers of bureaucracy in between, and certainly Red Cross women don't have a lot to do with Generals, though Sylvia had had more to do with Hubner than most because she was always making demands. Sylvia was a tough, tough lady. And Sylvia told the General...uh...got what she wanted most of the time, because the General didn't want to monkey with the Red Cross. He needed the Red Cross. Those donuts were very precious. Donuts and coffee kept American troops going. Uh...He called us in and said, "I hear there is going to be a Jewish meeting in London to talk about the future of all these Jews." And we said, "Yep." And he said, "You're going. You go my plane. When does the meeting start?" And we told and he said, "Okay. Two days before that, get out there and tell them for me to get all these Jews out of here. They should do everything they can do to get them out fast. It's not good for them and it is not good for us either." And he said it not unkindly, but he wasn't smiling. And Sylvia and I flew to London to the special Zionist Congress that was called in July in London, the chief purpose of which was to set the course that would lead to...uh...Israel's independence 3 years later, which meant that Ben-Gurion had a fight with Wietzman and Ben-Gurion wiped up the floor with Wietzman in a 4 hour Yiddish speech which, for me, is pretty unforgettable. Uh...What did he say? He did what Ben-Gurion always did. Ben-Gurion's idea of a speech was first to tell the history of the Jewish people, starting back with Abraham and working his way up. Sometimes I felt like he was going it minute by minute. Four hours was not his longest speech. Uh...He has made longer. And then rehearsing the Zionist movement from Belu all the way up...uh...and then minute by minute the events of World War II, subjectively stated so that Wietzman looked like an idiot who played the British and he was the savior who was going to see to it that we had a Jewish State. And they believed him. And Wietzman was really not in condition to do a proper answer. Wietzman aged 10 years in 5 days, and he became the old man, the inevitable person to the first President of the State. Powerless and ceremonial. That's what Wietzman became as of that day. Ben-Gurion became the leader of the Zionist movement. Uh...Sylvia and I did not spend much time in sessions. We spent our time meeting people that Steven Wise told us to meet to tell them about Czechoslovakia, to tell them about displaced persons, to tell them about the Haganah, and to urge certain kinds of support, none of which we had yet gotten. I met some fascinating people. Uh...I discovered this Lord Reading. Rufus Isaacs had gout, and that Lady Reading was really a lady and as passionate about...uh...Jewish things as any convert could be and...uh...all the leaders of the Zionist movement wanted to hear from us. We were the only people there from the occupied territories. That is, from Germany, Czechoslovakia, Austria. Nobody else there. Because nobody could get there. It never occurred to them for some reason or other to send some displaced persons over to tell the thing first person. There wasn't a single one there. So we were busy. And the General made that possible because that's how he wanted to get rid of the Jews. (Laughter) Benevolently! So he did not court martial me. He called me in. Actually, it was the Chief Staff who called me in and said, "We got this TWX from Austria." "Yes, Sir." "What the Hell have you been up to?" "TWX tells you what I have been up to." "We can't allow this." I said, "No, I suppose not. What'll you do." He said, "We're moving you so you can't do it." Alright, that was fine. Sylvia could keep the thing going and then other people took over. So far as I know some transports continued to go until the communists took over Czechoslovakia.
Q: I would like to halt a minute.
A: Yal.
A: Go back to London.
A: Yal.
Q: Uh...Something else happened, I believe, when you were in London. You met Leo Beck.
A: Huh? That has to do with Theresienstadt so we have to start.
