THIS IS AN INTERVIEW WITH: MF - Marian Filar [interviewee] EM - Edith Millman [interviewer] Interview Dates: September 5, and November 16, 1994, June 16, 1995 Tape one, side one:
EM: This is Edith Millman interviewing Professor Marian Filar. Today is September 5, 1994. We are interviewing in Philadelphia. Professor Filar, would you tell me where you were born and when, and a little bit about your family?
MF: Well, I was born in Warsaw, Poland, before the Second World War. My father was a businessman. He actually wanted to be a lawyer, and he made the exam on the university, but he wasn’t accepted, but he did get an A, but he wasn’t accepted.
EM: Could you tell me how large your family was?
MF: You mean my general, just my immediate family?
EM: Yeah, your immediate family. How many siblings?
MF: We were seven children. I was the youngest. I had four brothers and two sisters. Most of them played an instrument. My oldest brother played a violin, the next to him played the piano. My sister Helen was my first piano teacher. My sister Lucy also played the piano. My brother Yaacov played a violin. So there was a lot of music there.
EM: I just want to interject that Professor Filar is a known pianist. Mr....
MF: Concert pianist.
EM: Concert pianist. Professor Filar, could you tell me what your life was like in Warsaw before the war?
MF: Well, it was fine. I went to school, to the Gymnasium and graduated Gymnasium. I also went to The Warsaw Conservatory. I played my first concert at The Warsaw Conservatory when I was six years old. I played with the Philharmonic. I was a soloist when I was twelve, two concerts. The conductors were, first was Professor Walerian [unclear] and then Kazimierz Wielkomierski, two very famous names. Then, oh, well I played later in ‘59. I played in Warsaw, and I played [unclear].
EM: Well, excuse me. We will come to that later. Could you tell me if it was a religious family? Did you...
MF: Oh yes. My father was a religious Jew. I had my bar mitzvah when I was 13 and I spoke some Hebrew. And my grandfather was a rabbi.
EM: All right, now, did your mother come from an Orthodox family also?
MF: Yes, yes, her father, her father was a rabbi.
EM: Her father was a rabbi. Now...
MF: I have a picture of him.
EM: Well, later.
MF: Do you want to see it? I’ll show you. Hold on.
EM: O.K. [tape off then on]
MF: Am I Jewish?
EM: Do you...[chuckles] yeah, do you remember if your family experienced antisemitism just before the war?
MF: No.
EM: No, they did not.
MF: No, we didn’t feel any.
EM: O.K. Now you mentioned your father was in business. What kind of business did he have?
MF: Well, he had a wholesale business and Manufaktura, well, I don’t know, a man’s, not ready made clothes, just materials.
EM: Materials?
MF: Yeah. Yeah, it was a big place.
EM: O.K. Do you remember the name of the street where you lived?
MF: Yes. I know the name. Sienna 72.
EM: And where was his business?
MF: Gesia Osiem. Gesia 8.
EM: Oh, Gesia, on Gesia Street. Now...
MF: It does not exist anymore. It’s called Anielewicza today. It’s a different street. The whole town is different.
EM: Did you or your family belong to any Zionist organizations?
MF: Oh yeah, my father was a Zionist.
EM: Did you belong to any Zionist...
MF: No.
EM: Organizations?
MF: I had no time for it. I had a Gymnasium and I had a conservatory and that was it.
EM: Did any men in your family serve in the army, in the First World War?
MF: No, nobody was in the army. I don’t know why, because my...the other grandfather, my father’s father—this my mother’s father—my father’s father when he died he said, “None of my grandchildren will serve in the army.” And nobody did, my cousins, nobody. I don’t know, it was sort of, that was not liczbowy [inducted] if you know what that means.
EM: Yeah.
MF: Or, just they weren’t taken.
EM: Right.
MF: And they were all category A.
EM: Did all your brothers and sisters finish high school? You mentioned that you finished high school.
MF: Yeah, yeah, well, my sisters finished Gymnasium Landauowa on Czarna Street. And my one brother finished chinuch, one brother, Finkel. They all went to school. They all had at least Gymnasium.
EM: So they had at least Gymnasium. Now, what happened to your family following the German invasion? Were you in Warsaw when, during the invasion?
MF: No. I, well, first I ran away. We ran away and we went to the Bug River, came to Bialystok.
EM: Well, to the Bug River. I have to repeat it. Bug River.
MF: Yeah, the Bug River was the border between the German occupation and the Russian occupation. But when we arrived there, the Russians weren’t there yet. We didn’t invite them. All of a sudden, they crossed the border on the 17th of September. The war started on the 1st. We left Warsaw by the 6th, the 7th.
EM: Did the whole family leave Warsaw?
MF: Well?
EM: Who left Warsaw?
MF: In 1935 my mother sent one brother, Yaacov, was sent out to Israel, Palestine at that time, because she saw Hitler coming here. So she said, “One of my children has to go now because hell will all of a sudden turn loose here and maybe we’ll have a place where to go.” So he left in ‘35. And he, well, he left without a certificate. It was a whole story. He went as a tourist to Syria. From there with a couple of colleagues, they went through a little forest. The English were shooting after them. He fell, and it was at night, so he broke a leg in a little forest. He got into a hole at night. He didn’t see it. They put him in a hospital, in a jail hospital. And then the Zionist organization gave him a certificate and that’s how he finally made it to Palestine.
EM: To Palestine. Now...
MF: Now he was a great hero in the Second World War.
EM: O.K. We’re going to come to that a little later. Tell me, who left Warsaw when the Germans were fighting.
MF: Well, [unclear], who left was my brother Michael and my sister Lucy with her husband, and I. Yeah.
EM: So, were both your sisters, who was married of your siblings at that time?
MF: Oh, who was? Gerald was married, and Isaac was married.
EM: Did they have children?
MF: Yes, Isaac had a little boy. They were murdered.
EM: So you left Warsaw on September 17th?
MF: No, about the...
EM: No?
MF: 6th or 7th.
EM: Oh, 6th or the 7th. O.K., and you went to...
MF: To Bialystok. From there...
EM: To Bialystok. How long did you stay in Bialystok?
MF: Well, just a couple of weeks or so, because then I played a concert there. A colleague came from Lemberg. he said that our Professor Drzewiecki is in Lemberg. So I went to Lemberg, and I became his assistant, and I graduated summa cum laude.
EM: You graduated summa cum laude...
MF: Yeah.
EM: In Lemberg Conservatory.
MF: Right.
EM: And you stayed in Lemberg how long?
MF: Well, from 1939 till December, 1941, when I went back to Warsaw. I had a chance to run away further deep into Russia, but I didn’t want to.
EM: Who was in Warsaw at that time that you went back to?
MF: Well, my father, my mother, my oldest brother and his wife were at home, and my sister.
EM: O.K.
MF: My sister and Isaac was there too. Isaac was with his wife and little boy. So my oldest brother Joe, Isaac with his wife and little boy, and my parents, and my sister Helen. Yaacov was already in Tel Aviv and...
EM: O.K., now, could you tell me if you went directly, in 1941, there was a ghetto already. Did you...
MF: Where?
EM: In Warsaw. But I thought also...
MF: In Warsaw, yeah, not in Lemberg yet.
EM: Yeah, but, but you went back in 1941.
MF: Right.
EM: Did you go...
MF: My parents sent a guide for me, who looked more Jewish than I do. And nobody bugged him, but somebody bugged me, but I made it.
EM: You came back by train?
MF: Yeah. I was all night train and I was, so I’ll tell you this. I was sitting on a train. And there was a Polish railroad man who was off duty, and this slob, the railroad man which they used to have, and he looked at me. The way he looked at me, it didn’t look good to me. So I went out in the hallway, smoked a cigarette. A minute later he was standing right next to me and his nose next to my nose. “It looks like I got you, you Jew.” But I speak Polish better than he did. He didn’t know that. So I opened my mouth and I started to talk fast. And in fifteen minute his wrinkles just smoothin’ out, and a half he told me how he cheats on his wife. Yeah, but he told me that he smells a Jew a mile away. And I said, “You smell them a mile away? I smell them even two miles away!” I was a worse antisemite than he was. When we arrived in Warsaw about 6:30 in the morning, we said good-bye to each other and he said to me—well, I cannot speak Polish so I’ll say it in English—he said, “You know, if I wouldn’t have been talking to you all night, I would have been sure you’re a Jew.” I said, “Slow down, Mister, you’re insulting your friend so I might not like it.” And we shook hands and when he left I said, “I hope he breaks a leg.”
EM: You didn’t say it too loud?
MF: Nope.
EM: No? All right. Now, were your parents in the ghetto at that time?
MF: Yeah.
EM: Which one, the big ghetto or the little ghetto?
MF: Well, the little ghetto, on Sienna 72.
EM: They stayed on Sienna. You lived on Sienna and they stayed on Sienna.
MF: Yeah, right, Sienna, right.
EM: Will you tell me a little bit of what you did in the Warsaw Ghetto?
MF: First let me tell you, when I got home, when I got through that hole in the wall, well there was a Polish policeman there and I told him, I gave him twenty zlotys and I said, “I’m going to buy furs from the Jews because the German Army just gave out an order the Jews must give their fur coats away because the Germans were freezing in Russia.” So I said, “I’m gonna,” I pretended I’m a Polack and I said, “Here it is, twenty zlotys. When I come back with a fur I’ll give you more.” When I got through the hole and a Jewish policeman says to me, “Schmaltz.” He wanted money. I said, “I’m a Jew. Get lost.” And I bought a Magen David, put on my arm, went home. And it was seven [tape off then on]
EM: All right, you found your family on Sienna.
MF: Yeah. Well, I knocked on the door and my father said, “Who is it?” I said, “Me. Open the door.” So he couldn’t open the door because they had an iron bar on it, and it froze. That’s how cold it was. So I hear how he says to my mother, “Where’s the hammer?” Mother said, “In the bathroom.” So he went and got a hammer and knocked it off. And I’m telling you, [unclear] it was a reunion. It was quite a reunion. And it was about twelve noon and my sister Helen is still in bed. I said, “Why don’t you get up? Are you, do you have a cold or something?” She said, “No, I’ll get up a little later.” And my parents looked away. I see there is some trouble. I didn’t know what it was. I found out. She was paralyzed from the waist down. What happened was, she didn’t look Jewish. She was a blonde, blue-eyed girl, very pretty. And there was a time—it was, must have been in ‘42, whatever, I was, no, it was before, it must have been in 1940 or so, when I was in Lemberg, that the Gestapo was looking for Polish officers. So they found out about it, and they were hiding in the ghetto with their wives. So the Gestapo got wind of it and they got into the ghetto and stopped everybody that didn’t look Jewish. So they stopped my sister. They said, “You Polack, where’s your husband? Is he an officer? What are you doing here?” She says, “No, I’m Jewish.” They slapped her, took her to Gestapo headquarters on Aleja Schucha in Warsaw, beat the hell out of her, scared her like the devil... threatened her with death, whatever. And she, from that she got paralyzed. And the way she was walking through the room, she was holding onto chairs. That’s how she went to her death.
EM: And that was in what year? What year did you come back to Warsaw, in 1941?
MF: ‘41, December.
EM: In December.
MF: Right.
EM: So that’s why it was cold when your father couldn’t open the door.
MF: Right.
EM: Right? O.K., how did your father make a living?
MF: Well, who made a living? Whatever money he had left. Well, he sold his business as fast as he could. I remember, I walked into the bathroom and there were fish swimming around in the bathtub. Whatever somebody could get, you know, just to keep himself, whatever. Well, he had some money hidden, I guess, because he was selling out. The war was coming closer. He was selling as fast as he could. It wasn’t so hard, it wasn’t so easy, you know? Not, it was because they, the first business the Nazis cleaned out was my father’s business, by the way. Yeah. And so he was hiding the money which he was selling, he was hiding in a piece of cloth. And one day...the Germans were already there, and the doors were closed. And one of the employees had the keys with him and the Nazis caught him and said, “Where is it?” So they had him open up. They went in there, they chased everybody out and they took the keys. And the next day they came with trucks. And they were catching Jews to take the stuff out. Only one person knew where the money was. My father knew. So he put a raincoat on top of him, and got himself in between the people who were carrying his materials out, took this piece under his raincoat and ran. He was 65 years old. And the Germans were shooting after him. He was running, zigzagging. He was a pretty sporty man. They didn’t catch him. He ran away. Otherwise they would have nothing to eat the next day.
EM: That was in 1939, right after they came in or was it...
MF: No, it was 1939.
EM: In ‘39, that’s what I mean. 1939.
MF: Well you said ‘49.
EM: No, no, well, 1939.
MF: Right.
EM: O.K., now, how long did you stay in the ghetto? What happened next?
MF: Well, I was in the ghetto till the uprising.
EM: Now, on the...
MF: No, first they closed up the small ghetto and we moved, we got, I got a job on, it’s called Placówka, out of Warsaw West, working, going outside and working there for the German railroad. And we had to get out of the ghetto. They liquidated it, the small ghetto, and so everybody moved to the big ghetto. And then that time, the German railroad requisitioned, I mean they took over a house, an empty house, on Mila 7. Mila is a famous street. Mila 18 was famous.
EM: I know.
MF: Because the big guys, the tough guys were there. I was in Mila 7, almost across the street from them. And that’s where we were. All the people who worked for the railroad lived in that house. So my brother was with me. He also worked there, Joe my oldest brother, and I. And when we went there for the first, started to work there, they beat the hell out of us. They were...
EM: Where was the Placówka? Where did you [unclear]?
MF: Warsaw West.
EM: Oh, Warsaw West.
MF: Warszawa Zachodnia.
EM: [unclear].
MF: We had to carry rails, and do all kinds of physical work. And they, I guess they wanted money from us. We didn’t have anything anyway. And I remember there were open heads, they were beating to kill, always just beating somebody. And all of a sudden, here comes my first help. Excuse me. A German, a Polish railroad man comes over, goes up to a German and he says, “I need one man for work.” And he points at me. He says, “He’ll be a good one. Can I take him?” He says, “Take him.” We walk away. He said, “Don’t worry about a thing. You’re a colleague of my son,” who was a singer, a colleague at the conservatory. His father was working for the railroad, and he had a little house in the middle of the tot [track] I mean in English, in other words, he was switching rails when a train went one way or the other.
EM: Right.
MF: He had a little house there. So we went over to that house and there was his son! And I spent the rest of the day. We had a drink. He sang and I played. He saved me because he told me his son went went by, he saw the Nazis are killing us. And he recognized me. So, he sent his father out to save me. So, I went over there and then he took me back when the time, when, about six, seven o’clock to go back. He said, “This Jew works very good. I’ll take him next day too.” He says, “O.K. Come back.” Finally we found out what he wanted, and we gave him whatever we had—peanuts—and they stopped beating us. But I was saved because the, I think one was killed.
EM: Were these S.S. men that were beating you?
MF: Oh yeah, sure.
EM: Or were they just Wehrmacht?
MF: Yes, S.S. men.
EM: They were S.S. men.
MF: Mmm hmm.
EM: How many people would go out on your Placówka?
MF: How many we were?
EM: People.
MF: A group of about 100, 120 people.
EM: And you were going out every day to the same place to work?
MF: Yes, that’s right. We went out through the gate. I remember, and so and we were taking things with us. You know, like you could wear on your five, six shirts. Or you could wear a sheet around you, or two sheets. And they were pulling it out, while we walk on the street. We bribed the railroad men who were escorting us, and the Polish fellows were running along on the sidewalk. They said, “What do you have? We’ll do business with you.” So we gave them the stuff in the morning. It looked funny. Well, you’re pulling out something out of your, you know, giving them all the, taking shirts off on the street while you walk. They said, “What do you want for you go back?” I said, “Well, I want butter, I want this, I want bread.” And I remember, and I was wearing a raincoat on top of my winter coat, because I got a pound of butter. O.K., so what it was, we made a hole in a raincoat pocket so the butter fell all the way down to the bottom. There was a lining so it won’t fall out. Because the S.S. usually, when they checked us they put their arms around you here. They never went that low. But this time I was out of luck. This German went down, and he found it. And he said, “Butter willst du fressen?” [You want to eat butter?] And he hit me in the face so I had five fingers on my cheek for about a week. “Put that in the guard house and get the hell out!” So that was already behind the guards. There were five, six of them. So I put in the guard house. I put this packet down and took a bigger one and got home, it was two pounds of butter!
EM: Where did you get the bigger one? It was there?
MF: Right!
EM: [unclear].
MF: Well, everybody had one and when they’re caught they had to put it in this little guard house.
EM: Oh, and you...
MF: And that was already, they were behind us already. So I put this down. I said, “He told me to put it down.” I saw a bigger package. He didn’t see it. I put it under, and walked out. When I got home [unclear] my mother laughed [unclear]...
EM: [laughing] O.K., how long did you work on the Placówka?
MF: How? Till the uprising. And the uprising brought out, what was it, the 18th of...
EM: The first one, in January.
MF: No, the third...
EM: On the tenth of...
MF: No, the 18th of January...
EM: That was the...
MF: That was not the uprising yet.
EM: Well, it was the first resistance.
MF: The uprising was in April, Passover.
EM: Could you tell me about resistance in the ghetto before the uprising? Was there any?
MF: Yeah, let me tell you what happened. First of all, we never believed that that nice nation like, of Germans, who created so much in literature and music and so on could be such horrible murderers, the worst in the history of mankind. So, we one day started, when they put out the first announcements that the Jewish population of Warsaw is gonna be resettled further east where they’ll get work, and they’ll have place where to live and all that. And who comes freiwillig, on his own free will, to the train will get a what is it, a, two pounds of...
EM: A…
MF: Two pounds of bread or a pound of bread, two pounds of marmalade, or the other way around. So a lot of people, beggars who were dying on the street, literally dying from hunger. I once stepped on a dead body at night. I was going from my brother’s, who was on Sienna 30, to Sienna 72. There were no lights, nothing. It was dark already. It must have been ten in the evening. Then I walked, and all of a sudden I feel I’m step-, I stepped on something soft. And I looked, I’m standing on a belly of a dead man. It was just horrible. So they were going first. They didn’t care what will happen next. But how did we found out that they’re killing? The first time we found out, I found out, I had a girlfriend. Her name was Krysia Totenberg. Her cousin was a very famous violinist. She was a student of violin at the conservatory. When I went to, she lived not far from us, and I went to see her about something, and there was a cousin who came from Lublin. He was a tall, blonde, blue-eyed fellow, looked like a 100% Pole. He never looked like, not a trace of Jew in him. And he was sitting there, trembling, telling a.. . horrible story that they’re killing people, that all the mass murder was started in Lublin, around there. So he said that they’re killing people, they’re gassing them. I said, “Are you crazy or something? What is this?” He said he just ran away, he came here to warn. So the word started to spread around. But the way we found out...
EM: Do you remember when that was?
MF: It must have been maybe March, February or March ’43, somewhere around there.
EM: No, no, or ‘42.
MF: In ‘42 I lost my father. My father went to the Jewish Gemeinde, the Jewish community house, for something, and on the way the Nazis came in with trucks from both sides, cut off a block. The Jewish policemen stopped my father. A Jewish policeman. They put him on a truck; we never saw him again. And I was at the Placówka. I came home. My mother said, “Father is gone.” Just like that.
EM: That was in 1942…?
MF: ‘42, in the summer, when it started. Anyway...it must have been, it could have been ‘42 also, or yeah. So we started to, you know see, smell some horrible things. Because now, the Germans were fooling us very beautiful. One day, we had a group, as I mentioned, about 100, 120 people. Two or three guys, two guys didn’t go to work, because they had to buy, there was a black market there. They had to buy some stuff to have, you know, to take it out the next day. So they stayed in the ghetto. And that day then, when we went out to work, a lot of people went out to work, the Germans came in and grabbed the Jews who were there and sent them away to Treblinka. They grabbed them, too. And the next day we are working on the railroad station and these two guys are walking toward us. We said, “Hey! Where’d you come from?” They said, “From hell. Let’s go on the side and talk. You won’t believe it.” They went to Treblinka. They were unloading, they saw the whole, the devil, they saw the whole thing, the Commandant in the white uniform, the…
EM: A white uni-...
MF: He was in a white uniform, near the dig outs, where they, the mass graves, were full of dead bodies.
EM: The mass gr-...
MF: They were burning. There was a light there. It was just like Dante’s Inferno. That it looked like. And they were unloading the people so they, and they had to undress right there, and they were shot. So they hid. They were smart two kids. And they hid in the clothes. And they put the, the Germans put the clothes back on the train. So they smuggled themselves in somehow on the train, and that train was going back with the stuff to Berlin. So they were passing through Warsaw, and it was only one guard in the front and on the back. So when they saw through the little window where they are, they saw us working, and they jumped out of the train. So they told us what happened, what’s going on. “They’re killing everybody!” This is no baloney what he’s saying. So we said, “That’s it. Now we better start organizing. We’re not gonna go like sheep to the slaughter.” So we started to build the bunker, and we started to buy guns, whoever could. When we bought our guns, and the next day, yeah, how did we get a gun into the ghetto? If you knew some Polish fellows, how many bullets you think you could get. So we were allowed to take in a two-pound bread and some, a pound of...two pounds of potatoes, something like that. So they baked the gun into the bread, with the bullets. That’s how I did. So we smuggled it like this. This was allowed, so they didn’t check that. The next day, General Stroop I think it was, that man who liquidated the ghetto, pulls on the gate and says, “Cut the bread. The Jews have guns in there.” He knew it the very next day. We didn’t know how. If they would have caught us the day before, we would have been all shot on the gate. And then we started to build the bunker on Stawki Street, right there next to the, you know, in the ghetto. The first was a big ghetto. Then, when they moved everybody out then, I mean it was a, that big. When they moved out there was a smaller ghetto, a little ghetto here, and the big one here. So they moved everybody here and that was Niemandsland. It means nobody lived there, all right?
EM: The wild ghetto.
MF: So, yeah, so we are all in the wild ghetto. So we built our bunker on Stawki Street, which was right to the street which was Niemandsland. And we built that tunnel into the house, under the street, under the house, into a kitchen somewhere, in case our bunker is burning or something, we will be able to escape. We’ll be on the wild ghetto side and nobody, we had nothing to do with the uprising.
EM: So Stawki was still in the big ghetto? It wasn’t in the wild ghetto? [unclear].
MF: It was the border of it. Half of it was in the ghetto and half of it wasn’t.
EM: So it wasn’t.
MF: So that’s on [unclear]. So we were building it for, for...
EM: Oh, excuse me, the half that wasn’t in the ghetto, you mean it wasn’t in the ghetto or was the wild ghetto?
MF: No, that was in the ghetto.
EM: It was in the ghetto, was in the wild ghetto.
MF: In the ghetto, with a tunnel under the, into the wild ghetto.
EM: O.K.
MF: So, and the women were making suchary, you know, all kinds of, what do you call suchary?
EM: Biscuits?
MF: Biscuits, those things which could last long. And they were buying flour. You know, we were a group of about, you know, twenty people, maybe more. And some little cots, you know, so you, so maybe we could...
EM: Tell me, was your mother with you at that time?
MF: Yes. My mother was...
EM: Who was with you? Who of your family was with you...
MF: My mother and my sister, and my brother and his wife—Joe, and his wife.
EM: And you...
MF: Isaac was already gone.
EM: You were all, you...
MF: We were all then in one, we all lived in this same house, on Mila 7. We had one little apartment there.
EM: And the bunker? Who was building the bunker?
MF: We were, the guys from the Placówka.
EM: And that was prepared for the guys and their families from the Placówka?
MF: That’s right.
EM: Or just, or...
MF: That’s right. No, no...
EM: O.K.
MF: From, for everybody and their family. So we were...
EM: How...
MF: A small group of about twenty, twenty-five people.
EM: How large was the bunker?
MF: Now how large could it be? It had about two or three rooms. What could we put there? We had to keep sacks of flour and the suchary and things like this. Whatever we could, we built it. But how do you build a wall? How do you get out? How do you get in? So we, some genius, he had a great idea. There was a wall in the basement, down in the basement. So we took that cegly, the...now how do you call cegly? Bricks.
EM: Oh, oh, the bricks.
MF: We tore the bricks out. And the bricks which he took out from the wall you, we built here a little rail and a little platform. And we put the bricks on the platform, exactly. So when it goes, it went in, in other words it was inside. [moving away]
EM: Oh. Talk here.
MF: Oh yes. So where you put the bricks on there, the bricks were exactly fitting the wall, the hole in the wall. So we put it back in and when you looked from the outside, then it was closed. Didn’t see anything.
EM: That was on the rails?
MF: Yeah.
EM: On the rails.
MF: Yeah, but not here. On the inside it was.
EM: Yeah, uh huh.
MF: We went through the wall and closed, right?
EM: Uh huh.
MF: So that’s how we could go in and out.
EM: So you could just push the whole thing.
MF: Yeah. It was on two little rails. It was an ingenious guy to figure that out. Because we were afraid to tell everybody else. Because the idea was, if they’re gonna discover one bunker and they’ll say, “You wanna live? Tell where the others are.”
EM: That’s right.
MF: Right? So it was always secret. So when somebody said it was the leader of the uprising, it’s not so much of a leader [unclear]. There were groups, several groups. Because one was afraid that the other will say, when they catch him. So I don’t know how you can call it a leader. It was just self-defense more than an uprising. And of course we were all waiting for them when they came in, then people were lying on roofs and they started to shoot. And they found out that a bullet kills a Nazi just as well as it kills a Jew, that a Superman gets also killed. And he was dead. And they were running back pretty fast. And then they came with artillery, with tanks, with air force. So how long could you last? Well then we got out. The bunker started to burn, and we got out into the Niemandsland there. We were hiding for a while, and then they finally caught us, and we went together with the people who were inside to Majdanek.
EM: So who was caught of your family? Who was in your, in the bunker? It was your mother and your sister or not?
MF: No, my mother was already, my mother was gone already. What am I saying? My mother was gone on Jan-, my mother and my sister, on January 18th. It was a Monday afternoon. They came in, and we were all hiding in our apartment, together with my brother that they [unclear].
EM: That was in 1943?
MF: The 18th
EM: In, the 18th of...
MF: In 1943.
EM: And that was not on Stawki? That was, where was that?
MF: No, that was on Mila 7.
EM: On Mila 7. O.K.
MF: Mila 7, before Stawki. Because we built this later, after January. And there we were hid in that room, were about 30 people. And we put a lot of dirt around and we just put a night stand in front of that hole there. And the Germans were so smart that one was going on the street, the other one’s going from window to window. So he said, “Two windows. You went in there.” That’s what we figured out later. And they discovered us. And they took us to Umschlagplatz.
EM: You mean from the outside they saw that there were no windows?
MF: Yeah, and then there were birds also on the sills of the window, because it was warm there, from the people. It was in January. And also there were some [unclear], I don’t know, on the windows some. So they saw that and they destroyed it. And they took us to Umschlagplatz. So my sister was holding on to my mother. She was limping, holding on to me. And that’s how we went to Radom. I was there now. I looked at, in that school. There was a school, they built a public school before the war. It was junior school, and that’s where they kept us. And they built a railroad tracks to that school. Then when the railroad people saw that we didn’t come to work, and so from the others, too, from, the Air Force had some people working there. So they ran and they said, “We must have these people work, back to work. Otherwise the railroad cannot function.” We were in a basement. I remember there was a policeman there—I could see his legs walking along, a Polish policeman—so I called him in Polish. I said, “I want to talk to you.” He says, “Oh zyd sedziesz namydlo?” [They’re gonna make soap out of you.] He didn’t want to talk to me. Because my teacher made me a false document as a Pole. And I was waiting for one for my brother.
EM: So where were you at that—I’m not quite clear—where were you at that time when you saw his legs walking back and forth? You were in, on Mila Street?
MF: On Mila 7. Yeah, I was the...
EM: O.K., on Mila 7.
MF: Ostbahn. That was, the house was called the Ostbahn. That’s where we lived. Anyway, so I was...I could have gone out. I had a place.
Tape one, side two:
EM: Side two, tape one, interview with Professor Filar, Edith Millman interviewing. Professor Filar, I want to go back a little bit in time. And you had mentioned before that you played the concert in the ghetto. Could you tell me a little bit about it?
MF: Oh sure. And I think it should be brought out, because hardly anybody mentions that, or maybe people don’t know it. I don’t know. There was a movie house built in Warsaw just before the war; they finished it, and they were not allowed to open it up because it was one foot I think too close to a church. And it was on Leszno Street...the movie house was in Leszno Róg Solna. And the church was on Leszno Róg Karmelicka, I think it was. And it was just one foot or two feet too close and they never opened it up. In the ghetto nobody came to the church, I guess. So they opened it up and, not as a movie, but as a concert hall. And we, a lot of musicians, some were members of the Warsaw Philharmonic played, and we had a wonderful conductor. His name was Marian Neuteich who was a fine, very fine viol-, eh, cellist. And he was a cellist for the radio symphony. So they created a symphony orchestra.
EM: Where, did you know the conductor before the war? Or did you...
MF: No.
EM: You did not.
MF: No, I didn’t know him as a conductor. I heard of him that he was a great cellist. But he was also a conductor. So he conducted the orchestra, and they engaged me, and I played with him the Tchaikovsky Concerto. But we announced that we’re playing the Mendelsohn. Because the Germans...
EM: But did you tell me...
MF: Wouldn’t let you play anybody but Jewish composers. And by the way, Mendelsohn was, I think his father already became a Christian or something, and so he was already born non-Jew, but he had a Jewish name. So, we announced that playing the Mendelsohn Concerto, and we played the Tchaikovsky. But we didn’t have the music. So we smuggled the music from the Polish side, over the wall I think they told me, because the orchestra did that. They had colleagues in the orchestra in the Philharmonic, from the Warsaw Philharmonic. So they got the music and we played the Concerto. I remember my parents and my sister Helen were in the audience. So, there were also chamber music concerts on Orla Street. That was, I remember now, I forgot that name completely, it just came to me. And there was a great young—he was maybe two years younger than I—violinist by the name of David Zaider, blessed memory, a wonderful talent. And we played chamber music together, piano violin sonatas. He was murdered. And there was a great singer, a fantastic talented girl, Marysia Eizenstadt, whose father was a conductor of the Great Synagogue Choir. And I sang in that choir when I was a kid. And my father was a member of that synagogue. So, of course, and Marysia was also murdered, you know. And so all this disappeared. But I think it should be mentioned that in all hell, in this kind of a hell, the Jews still had a symphony orchestra. And it’s first, hardly mentioned anywhere. And I think that’s why I want to emphasize it, emphasize it, and emphasize it, because it’s unfair not to mention this kind of a great organization, in this kind of a hell.
EM: Could you tell me a little more about who organized it?
MF: This I don’t know, because I came to Warsaw in ‘41. I was away. So when I came back, they were already in existence. So I had no idea who did it.
EM: How often did the concerts take place?
MF: Well I don’t remember exactly. There weren’t many, because I came in ‘41, in December. And in ’42 in August, August 17th, I think it was, I already lost my father. So it was just a few months, you know. So they had a few concerts...it was not, you know, there wasn’t, the freedom wasn’t there to move around. It wasn’t that easy to [tape off then on]
EM: Could you tell me, how did people know about the concerts?
MF: You got me. I, well they advertised. They advertised.
EM: Tell me how, O.K., well how did they have...
MF: They had a poster in front of the building.
EM: They had a poster.
MF: And the poster lied. The poster said we’re playing the Mendelsohn Concerto. And we played the Tchaikovsky, because we’re not allowed to play any other but Jewish composers. Funny that I recorded that concerto in Munich, in 1970 or ‘71 I was there. First I.. .
EM: And we’re going to talk about this a little later.
MF: Yeah.
EM: Let’s stick to the war.
MF: But I mean that’s the same concerto so...
EM: [unclear].
MF: Funny, I later, here you were not allowed to play it. Now I played it in Germany.
EM: All right. Was Mendelsohn played at all? Or was it because...I know that Beethoven and Mozart was played.
MF: Sure. But they announced somebody else. They announced Meyerbeer or whatever it was, you know. But it was, you went in there and you know what was being played, because the Germans didn’t permit.
EM: O.K. Did the Judenrat pay for the musicians? Or don’t you remember.
MF: I don’t remember that. Money doesn’t...
EM: You don’t remember if you got paid for playing?
MF: No, no, I don’t.
EM: I just, I wanted to know if that was under the auspices of the Judenrat.
MF: I guess they paid them something. They probably paid them something for it. Who had money then? You know, everybody was impoverished.
EM: All right. I know that there were many musicians even in the streets, street musicians...
MF: Right.
EM: In 1942. All right, so you lost your father in August of 1942?
MF: August 17th, 1942. He went to the Jewish Gemeinde, I mean to some, for something. I don’t know what, and then he never came back. And we heard that the Nazis came with trucks on both sides of the block, cut the block off, and that was it. Whoever was on the street they grabbed them, put them on a truck and sent them away and killed them.
EM: Now I.. .
MF: Just like that, like you never had a father. And you couldn’t react. You could...I don’t know, blow up, that he can’t, the impotence! You can not do anything!
EM: And your mother was taken later? You know...
MF: Yeah. My mother...
EM: You told me...
MF: And my sister Helen.
EM: You were at the Umschlagplatz.
MF: Right.
EM: You mentioned you were at the Umschlagplatz.
MF: That was January 18th, 1943.
EM: And you got out from the Umschlag-, away from the Umschlagplatz?
MF: Yeah, that’s right. But I didn’t want to get out. And it was quite a very tragic story for me, because we went there, we stayed over night. And in the morning—I worked for the railroad station, so the Germans from the railroad station came in—and they said, “We need the workers. Otherwise the railroad won’t work.” You know, and they raised hell. So they said, “Today we let out the men. Tomorrow we’re letting out the women.” So I said—my oldest brother was there, too, and my mother and my sister, and my oldest brother’s wife, the three women and two of us—so he said, “Come on! Let’s go. They’ll come.” I said, “No, I don’t believe it. I don’t want to go.” And I was crying, and holding onto my mother. And he grabbed me, and my mother pushed me and says, “Go! You’ll be a great pianist. We’ll be very proud of you. And we’ll come tomorrow. Don’t worry about it.” Somehow, my brother pulled me away. And I cried. I didn’t want to, I really didn’t want to go. And it’s eating me all those years. And sometimes I don’t even want to say it, because it’s my private tragedy. And my mother said, “I bless you.” [pause; tape off then on] “Come on! They’ll let them out tomorrow!” So we went to work. Came tomorrow, we went to work, we came back, and there was still a lock on my, on the apartment where I was with my mother and my sister. They never came back. [pause; weeping]
EM: So they went on a transport probably the same day.
MF: And we stayed overnight. I remember in the basement of that, see, I was there now. Just a couple of months ago I went there with my nephew. And I said, “That’s where I saw my mother for the last time, down there in that basement.” The school is still there. It was a public school. They just built it before the war. And the Germans built the railroad tracks...[sighs]
EM: Professor Filar is overcome by emotion, so we will interrupt the interview for a while. [tape off then on]
MF: Yeah, [unclear]. And you saw a picture how beautiful she was. I call her beautiful. [weeping] I never called her mother. I always called her beautiful. My sister would say, “Are you calling me?” I’d say, “Shut up, you know better.” [laughs] And my mother laughed.
EM: Well, your mother was a beautiful woman.
MF: Yeah, she was beautiful inside and outside. [weeping; tape off then on] ...to be such murderers! Who would believe it?
EM: Where did you, so you went back to work, to your Placówka from there.
MF: Yeah. And then what happened was, I got in touch with my teacher. And he said, “We have a place for you. You’re gonna be hidden.” Do you have it on? [pause] He, they sent a colonel, a Polish colonel, who was an uncle of a colleague of mine, Levitsky was his name. He came to the railroad station to Warsaw West. And I gave him a picture. And he got me a Kennkarte, [identity card] a false Kennkarte. And he said, he came in and he said, “It’ll be ready in a day.” I said, “I would like, I cannot go out till I have one, for my brother” that was my oldest brother. He’s alive. He lives near Washington now. He’s alive. He’s 93 years old. We were seven kids and, I was the one that was born, I don’t know how many years later. By the way. I was an accident. And so, and I was supposed to be hidden in a hrabia potocki, [count] I mean dobra, [estate] you know, in some estate near Lublin somewhere. And there was also hidden somebody else I heard after the war, Prokurator Sawicky, [public prosecutor] who hanged all the Nazis in Majdanek. Have you ever heard that name?
EM: Yeah.
MF: Sawicky. His name was Jerzyk Reisler. His father-in-law was a very famous lawyer in Lemberg by the name of Leib Landau, who defended, that was Proces Steigera. [law suit] It was...
EM: But I don’t remember that.
MF: That was a, you remember something like this?
EM: No.
MF: He was a very famous lawyer. So he changed his name, married a Polish Catholic woman, and he was there. Then I heard that they raided the place and they found him or he escaped, something. Well, anyway, so I didn’t go because I waited for the documents for my brother. Meantime the uprising broke out. Now, but we were already building, we had our bunker already. I think I showed you how we got in...
EM: Yes.
MF: And how we got out.
EM: Yeah.
MF: With that little thing on the rails.
EM: Yeah, you...
MF: Yeah, and then we were outside in the wild ghetto, and that’s how they caught us. So we said, “We had nothing to do with the uprising.” You know, we were, and they took us together with everybody else to Majdanek, to Block 16. Now that was a Feld drei, mean field number three, and the Block was 16. And I was there, in ‘92 I was there. And I went to see it. I had a student of mine with me and I played with the Philharmonic. After it was done we hired a car, and we went to Majdanek.
EM: Yeah. My, that was in 1992.
MF: Yeah.
EM: Could we go back to your arrival in Majdanek? What was your impression? What did you know about Majdanek?
MF: Oh, we got a special treat, because we were the uprisers from the Warsaw Ghetto. They put us in the Block 16. And there were about, I don’t know, there were plenty of Blocks on each side. There was a Block here and a Block there. And they put a fence around that Block. So, everyone knew who the uprisers are there. And we got special treatment. That means they woke you up in the morning with a baseball bat. And if you’re not out of bed after the whistle, a second later they were in the barrack and they were killing people. Just killing. So, we were there, I was there nine weeks. And I was already, I was just about ready for the garbage can.
EM: Did you work at that time?
MF: Yes. When you say work...
EM: What...
MF: We were beaten to death. They were just trying to kill us, that’s all. Anyway, so what happened was, I became friendly with a Polish fellow, by the name of Antek. He was a foreman or something. I don’t know. He was in the barracks there. Of course there were...
EM: Now was he also a prisoner? An inmate?
MF: Yeah.
EM: He was an inmate.
MF: Sure. He was an inmate. But he knew something was going on, so he saw me how I was, I couldn’t get in that barrack. I had to pull myself by the door handle. I was down already, I don’t know how many pounds. I was barely alive. And I was a young kid. So he said to me, “You’re not gonna live much longer.” He said, “I heard that they’re coming from labor camps, so you better get out of here. You just report, and they’ll take you to a labor camp and there you could survive. But here it’s just the end.” So, a couple of days later they came, Brown Shirts came, we didn’t know from where. I think that they were from Czestochowa. Later on we found out. So I ran to the kitchen where my brother worked. He got himself a job, Julek got himself a job, my oldest brother, who is alive, got himself a job in the kitchen. He was peeling potatoes. He was eating raw potatoes. And I found out that you can eat them and it won’t harm you. I didn’t know that. So I ran to him. I said, I knew, I told him what this fellow said. I said, “I’ll let you know.” So I ran and said, “Let’s go.” He says, “I’m not going.” I says, “What do you mean?” “I don’t want to go.” I says, “Why not?” “It doesn’t rain on me here. I’m eating raw potatoes. Nobody beats me. How long I’ll live, I’ll live. I’ll die anyway, so what’s, I don’t want to go.” So I didn’t go either. The next day Antek sees me. He says, “What the hell? Why didn’t you go?” So I told him what happened. He says, “He doesn’t want to go? So he stays, and you go. Because you’re gonna die here. Get out of here! I’ll kill you if you don’t go with the next one, because they’re coming again.” So I told him this. The next day, it might be a day or two later, they came. This one was, later on I found out it was from Skarzysko-Kamienna. It was a labor camp there. So I ran to him again, and before he said something I said, “If you’re not going, I’m going by myself. Because I’m gonna die. And you’re gonna die, too.” So he...I finally yelled at him so he threw the apron and said, “Oh what the hell, I’m going.” So we went into a group. We were about maybe four or five or, three, four hundred people. I didn’t count them, I don’t know, a big, big group of people. We stood in a row of five. And I had swollen legs, and the ankles were swollen from hunger. So they were Brown Shirts. So, first they said that you had to run about twenty, thirty meters. Because who fell was too weak. They don’t want to take weak people to work. It was supposed to be a labor camp, work on ammunition or something. I didn’t fall. I made it. I was, so I figure, I made it. Not so fast. So, they threw these, they didn’t kill them, they just threw, they killed them all later. So they threw them out. Then they, these Brown Shirts went again to the front of the group, and I was like in the middle. There were five in a row and I was right in the middle of those five. Two on my left, two on my right. He goes up in the front and said, “Hosenhoch!” Pull up your pants. So whoever had swollen legs, “Raus,” threw them out. So I said, “That’s the end of me.” I had swollen ankles. How did I get out? And that was a God’s miracle. You won’t believe this. I don’t believe it myself. He comes to my row just about ready, he had a row, the five in front of me, went forward. They had, nobody had swollen legs, so they made it. He just about opened his mouth and an S.S. man knocks on his shoulder. He wants to talk to him. So he turns around, and they started to talk. So I said to the fellow in front of me, “You don’t have swollen legs. Change with me. You’ll make it again, and they’ll throw me out.” So he says, “I don’t want to. I’m afraid.” So, guys heard it around, so they said, “Change! There’s a life to be saved! If you don’t change, we’ll kill you!” So they scared the hell out of him and we changed in a second. And the moment we changed he, this...Brown Shirt changed around and said, “Hosenhoch!” He pulled these pants up again and he got out and I got out. That’s how I got out. Wasn’t that a miracle?
EM: [unclear]
MF: I’m trembling when I hear it. When I think about it that a few weeks later they machine gunned everybody there. So we got to Skarzysko-Kamienna. There’s another chapter. We came in there and well, I was pretty weak. My brother was all right, because he was in the kitchen. And we, there were three-, Werker, that means three branches of Werk, A Werk, B Werk… A, B, and C. I don’t know what Werk means in English, factories.
EM: Factories.
MF: Factories A, factory B and C. C was a killer, because they made some yellow stuff, the trotti, and they would all turn yellow. Their clothes were yellow, their faces were yellow, and they died. Somehow we got into Werk A. And we stand there and wait, whatever it is. A group comes from work, and I see a colleague of mine from when I was at Conservatory, Irene, who lives now in New York.
EM: A what? A colleague?
MF: A colleague, a Jewish girl. She was a foreman. She spoke German. She got German, she had German in high school. I had French. She looked at me and said, “Boy, how do you look like? It’s horrible!” So she said, “I know somebody who gives, who is giving out a soup. So I’ll talk to him and you’ll get an extra portion.” So I got an extra portion and my brother, he got. Then we, so he said, “Report here. Otherwise you’ll be on Werk C; they’ll kill you.” So she told me I have Werk A, I mean that factory A. So we were put in there and we made it. So we got to Werk A. Then came, and we got a job. I sat in a hall, in a Halle, it means in a big...
EM: A big hall.
MF: In a big hall. And I was sitting there and cutting, it’s called Stützringe. I don’t know how it is in English. They were, a double things like this, like if you, those two glasses, and you cut it in the middle, they became two parts, from one.
EM: What was it, metal? Was...
MF: It, yeah, metal. It looked like maybe a part for a machine gun or something. I don’t know. But I was, remember when I had to go to the men’s room, it must have been like from here almost to the road here, maybe a little closer.
EM: [unclear].
MF: It took me forever to make it. And I saw it, where the guys were walking fast. I said, “Did I used to walk that fast?” I said, “I was walking like them.”
EM: Yes.
MF: And they said, “The younger Filar is gonna kick the bucket. It won’t take too long.” In the meantime another miracle happened. I once got a, an extra portion of marmalade. I don’t know, remember how, but I got it. I knew that marmalade doesn’t have much nourishment. I wanted to have bread for it. So I wanted to sell it. Werk A wasn’t, where we worked it were not so, it was called Automaten, automatic. We were working on automat-, and the Polacks were also working there because that was a Polish munitions factory before the war. So they still worked there.
EM: This was in Skarzysko-Kamienna?
