United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Alice Masters
January 12, 2000
RG-50.106*0130 PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a taped interview with Alice Masters, conducted on January 12, 2000 in Bethesda, Maryland by Esther Finder on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
ALICE MASTERS
January 12, 2000 Beginning Tape One, Side A
Question: This is the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum volunteer collection interview with Alice Masters, conducted by Esther Finder, on January 12th, 2000 in Bethesda, Maryland. This is a follow up interview that will focus on Alice Masters’ post Holocaust experiences. In preparation for this interview I have listened to the interview you conducted with the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum on November ninth of 1995. I will not ask you to repeat everything you said in that interview, instead I will use this interview as an opportunity to follow up on that interview and focus on your post Holocaust experiences. This is tape number one, side A. I would like you to please just establish what was your name at birth?
Answer: Alice -- ali -- well, actually it was Alixa Eberstarkova. Eberstark, but being a female it is ended with ova, Eberstarkova.
Q: When were you born?
A: May 10, 1925.
Q: And where were you born?
A: In [indecipherable] Czechoslovakia.
Q: And where were you during World War II?
A: In lond -- in England, mostly in London.
Q: And I would like you to explain to me how you came to work for the Czech government in exile in England.
A: I -- well, I associated mostly with refugees, especially with je -- refugees from Czechoslovakia. I belonged to a organization called Young Czechoslovakia. And it -- there I met many people who worked in the Czech government. Of course, I didn’t have a chance of ever getting into the Czech government, but I met a young man who was a -- a private in the Czech army and one day my uncle asked me to take something to the Czech government, a document, to his friend, mis -- Dr. Schlesinger who worked there, who was a official there. And wi -- on the way to going to see Dr. Schlesinger I met this young soldier and he said to me, oh, what are you doing here? Are you working for the Czech government? I said no, no. I -- I don’t know a minister -- any ministers yet. So -- because it was so difficult to get into it, I’m -- just almost impossible. And he said, well come and see me at two o’clock. And I went to see Dr. Schlesinger, my uncle’s friend and I said, this man, I didn’t even know his name, a-asked me to come and see him at two o’clock. And he said well, if he told you to go and see him, go and see him. So I -- I asked him for his name and he told me what his name was. I described the gentleman to him, and then at two o’clock I went to his office, and as I enter the office it said, Minister Meyer. I was completely stunned because he was so young, and I had absolutely not expected that -- that he would be -- have a -- have a position like that in the Czech government. In any case, he asked [indecipherable] -- should I put them here? And so I saw him and he a-asked -- of course I was very surprised and he was surprised at my surprise, and he arranged for me to take a test. At that time however, I was working for a company that was important for the war effort and they [indecipherable] want to release me, so for six months I was not released, but after six months I was -- the position was still held for me and that’s how I got to work in the Czech government. But -- should I continue on that?
Q: What was the test?
A: Oh well, I -- the test was extremely complicated. This mi -- Minister Meyer called up a colleague of his and asked me to -- asked him to give me a test. When I came to his office the test consisted of -- he asked me to translate the “Financial Times” from English to Czech. Course, I didn’t understand a word of the “Financial Times” in English, let alone in Czech. So I sat at the typewriter with the “Financial Times” staring me in the face -- mind you, I was very young, of course, I didn’t understand English very well, and of course eco-economics was beyond me. And I was terribly embarrassed and I didn’t know what to do and I decided the best thing to do is to just get up and go home, which I did, and I left. At that time we -- my sister and I lived at the YWCA. And when I came home in the evening there was a message from Minister Meyer saying come back for another test. So I was really, really surprised. Obviously he was very a-a-anxious to help me to get into the government and he wanted me to have a job. So I came back for another test and this time he gave me a sheet of type -- typed material to copy type, which was, of course, very easy to do. And that was my second test and that’s how I succeeded in getting into the government.
Q: When you worked for the government in exile, what were your duties and responsibilities?
A: Well obviously I came in at very low levels, but I was a bilingual secretary. Of course I -- since I left Czechoslovakia, since I left the school system in Slovakia at the age of 13, my expertise in the language was very limited. But -- and so I’m -- but I suppose able to obvi -- obviously speak fluently and I was required in the Czech government to write and to work in Czech. And I was brought up in the Slovak schools, so I still hadn’t learned the Czech when I got into the government, but I managed to get through. I don’t know, one does the best one can and survives. And people were very ha -- friendly and -- and people helped. And so what I did was mostly Czech correspondence and also I did subtitles for films. I did the -- what do you call it? The little te -- the translations, you know, I typed those for Czech films, in Czech. And I did Czech and English correspondence.
Q: When exactly did you start working for the Czech government in exile?
A: I think it was -- I would have to look it up but I -- I can’t remember exactly. I think it must have been in ’44, 1944, maybe a little earlier, because I came to England in 1939. I lived in Sussex in the children’s home for a year, then I went to school for another year. And I worked for one year at [indecipherable] at the bookstore, and then I worked -- it must have been foy -- ’39 - ‘40 -- ’40 -- I would imagine ’43 - ’44 I started working for the Czech government. But I could easily look it up later and tell you, okay?
Q: With whom did you work?
A: Well most -- of course obviously I -- I -- all these people were refugees. I -- one -- I mean, I know that the minister -- Meyer, who was minister, I did not work with him. He was head of the whole thing, I hardly ever saw him. I can’t remember the people’s names, but I do have -- I would ha -- I have it written somewhere. There were different people, I mean economists, politicians, I mean, I don’t know. I worked for the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Ministry of Finance, Industry and Commerce.
Q: What information were your privy to?
A: Not very much. I mean, you know, not really much information, just correspondence I don’t even remember what it is that -- who we’re writing about. But I did th -- mostly -- I remember maybe, that I did short letters, either in English or -- or -- or Czech, and that I did the films. Possibly did some accounting and other wor -- secretarial work. But not really. I was not a -- I was not privy to any kind of information.
Q: I understand you do -- have said that there was nothing that you knew that the general public didn’t know.
A: That’s correct, that’s correct.
Q: Were you working for the government when the Auschwitz protocols were released by the Czech government? I don’t know if you could comment on that.
A: I was, but I’m afraid I don’t know anything about it. I really didn’t at that time. Because first of all, we were really in a very -- let’s say it was sort of like in a state of shock, let’s put it that way. And we were sort of barely managing to exist anyway, because we were trying to make a living. We lived through the London blitz, we didn’t -- I mean, we had to concentrate on survival, on surviving and we were terribly afraid of what’s go -- what’s going on in Europe. We heard terrible things but we didn’t want to believe it because we were very frightened for our family. And we just lived from day to day and we were mostly together with refugees, other refugees. And of course we were just -- were not integrated into the British world. And what happened was that we lived, at first -- I mean, I don’t know exactly the dates, but I would -- I would be able to look them up because I kept all the papers, but we n -- at first we lived in a chur -- when we -- after -- after we left the ho -- children’s home, we lived in another girls’ home run by a ger -- German refugee woman. And we were four girls to a home and then we lived -- my sister and another friend and I lived in a room rented from another -- in a house from another refugee, a lady. And we socialized mostly with other refugees. In the evenings we got together with other refugees and we just talked about our s -- but we had some very good times together, too, we had good social evenings, we went to the theater. We went dancing, we had it -- we were very close together because we were all in the same boat. But we were not included in the life of the British, and especially not in Jewish community. I don’t remember that we have ever been invited to a Jewish holiday, to a family. I don’t think of -- I don’t think so. I can’t remember that we ever had a Seder in England, or anything like that. So we just sort of s-sat around waiting for the end of the war because we thought we would -- we were very anxious for the war to end so that we could go home.
Q: You mentioned a moment ago that there were things that you heard that you didn’t want to believe. What kinds of things were you hearing that were -- were frightening you?
A: Well, hearing terrible things about what was going on in the [indecipherable] concentration camps. We weren’t sure -- we didn't know the extent of -- of the things and we hoped -- and we always thought that our parents and af -- that our father would survive, because we thought -- he was very popular in the village and he was very important in the me -- running of the village, actually, because he was very helpful with things like the -- he was friendly with the mayor and he was friendly with the local population. He helped whenever there was any kind of problem with the fire engines. He was into everything, actually in -- and he was very handy. He was a mechanic and [indecipherable] a farm, we had some farm animals and he was very friendly with the local population, so I thought people would protect him. So we were hoping that h -- we kept on saying that probably our parents would be okay, but still we worried terribly about our friends and about the rest of the family. Because my father’s family, the majority of the family lived in Poland, just across the border from where we were in Zakopane. We lived in a northern -- northern part of Slovakia, which is very close to the Polish border. And so we worried. And of course, during the war my father -- I mean, before the war, when Austria was occupied and Germany -- ther-there was trouble in Germany, my father used to walk refugees from those countries across the mountains to -- to Poland because they were escaping from Austria and from Germany. So we worried, of course, about Poland, family in Poland. And of course, about our grandparents. Oh, and there was one other thing. My grandmother, who was -- lived in Zakopane, came to live with our parents, because when things got bad in Poland she came across to Czechoslovakia and lived with our parents, and we knew that this was going to be extremely difficult for our parents because I knew that my father would never leave as -- as long as his mother was staying with him.
Q: In your previous interview, you mentioned that there was some anti-Semitism in your village. I wanted to ask you, what was the official position of the government in exile on the treatment of the Jews?
A: It didn’t come up in our conversation. It didn’t. I didn’t know what the position was. I have met people who have been in the Czech Air Force here after the war, and they said they -- they -- they were an-anti-Semitic. I didn’t experience any anti-Semitism in the Czech government at all. In fact, many of my coworkers were Jewish refugees. So, I mean, I just felt very comfortable there. In fact, the majority -- I mean, I will get to that later probably, but most of the people I worked with were Jewish, okay? [phone ringing]
Q: Let me stop for just one moment, we have a disturbance. [tape break] Okay, we’re back. I’m sorry for that interruption. I had asked you if you had experienced any anti-Semitism with respect to your work for the government in exile. Did you experience any anti-Semitism any time while you were in England?
A: Yes, actually, we did, and the -- we lived in the YWCA for five years. We lived there as long as they allowed us to live there, because after five years we had to move. But especially during the problems in Palestine, people were very anti-Semitic. I mean, there was one woman in particular that used to make remarks which were very painful to me. But otherwise the matron and the rest of the people were not Jewish -- I mean we were the only Jewish girl -- as far as I know we were the only Jewish -- three Jewish girls at the YWCA. And I don’t remember that there was any anti-Semitism except one or two people were anti-Semitic. But of course, they were careful when we were around, they didn’t say much. But one person was very outspoken.
Q: What kinds of things did she say?
A: Oh, she was very angry about what happened with Bernadotte, when he was assassinated, and she f -- said some terrible -- I mean, she had said very painful things which were very pr -- very painful to me because I felt, since we experienced so much anti-Semitism at home and since what was going on in Europe, and then we are experiencing it in England, I felt very disillusioned, but you know, that kind -- that was the only one, as far as I remember.
Q: While you were in England, were you aware of any attempts to smuggle Jews into Palestine, during the war years especially, or immediately after the war?
A: Not during the war, but immediately after the war I had a cousin who survived a concentration camp and I went to visit her in Paris. And there she lived in -- outside Paris in a home with lots of small children from the camps, and I knew that the [indecipherable] went to Palestine. And she was one of the people who was [indecipherable] out, that took those children to Palestine. But in England, no. Course -- course we were very involved with knowing what was going on in Palestine and we were very Zionistic. I mean we -- I thought I would end up in Palestine one day, but -- in Israel, but it didn’t work out that way.
Q: Was there any public rush -- recognition in England of the existence of the Jewish brigade in the British army?
A: Not that I know -- I mean, I did -- I wasn’t aware of it. But because we were very pat-patriotic, we knew about the Czech army, we knew about all the other armies, but I didn’t know about the Jewish brigade.
Q: Did you follow the local BBC broadcasts and the local newspapers regularly during the war years?
A: Yes indeed, we followed the BBC. Every single evening at nine o’clock they played the national anthems. Af -- and we waited every single night at nine o’clock to hear the anthem of Czechoslovakia, because we were se -- I -- unbelievably patriotic, when I -- we were just brought up that way, that we were just hoping for the end of the war and we just wanted to hear the national anthem because [indecipherable]. And so we listened to the news, we listened to BBC, we listened, we read the paper. Yes, we knew what was going on, as much as possible. Course we didn’t underst -- our English was limited, but we als -- but we had a lot of informations through the young Czech clubs.
Q: How was the liberation of Bergen-Belsen reported in the British media?
A: Don’t [indecipherable]. I don’t remember much about it. I mean, that whole time it was -- I don’t know whether it was because we were so frightened to even think about these things or look at the papers or hear about it, that I don’t recall anything about it, really. I don’t even remember when I first heard about Auschwitz, and I don’t remember much, except that we lived sort of in fear of this, what was going on and -- and I don’t remember how I found out about these things.
Q: How did you learn that the war was over?
A: I don’t even recall where I was when the war was over, but I know that we were -- again, it was partly because of fear, because we didn’t know what we would find, we were terrified of not know -- of what -- what we would find. And we -- and we weren’t sure what would happen to us, where -- where we would go, what -- of course we were all waiting to go home, but we weren’t sure what we would find, so therefore the whole thing was just a complete blank as far as I’m concerned. I think I sort of forgot it all, because of fear. I really don’t remember it.
Q: Can you describe the London that you do remember at the end of war? What was London like when it was over?
A: You mean immediately after the war? Well, it was completely -- well, first of all, we lived through the entire blitz in London, and I think I’ve never been -- maybe once I went to a shelter. London was -- oh, we were just -- it was -- it devastated, was bombed, all of it, everywhere. It was -- we were very in -- limited in our rations, but everybody had a tremendous spirit and everything -- everybody worked and it -- and look -- was excited about the end of the war, of course, naturally. And there was great excitement that the war was over. Everybody was so hardworking and dedicated and they had business as usual everywhere, on every shop, no matter whether the bombs fell the day before. And we -- as far as we were concerned, we were thrilled with the war being over. We immediately cabled to our village to find out about our parents. We ran to all the places where Red Cross posted lists of people who were -- we found out about the camps at that point and we went, looked to see whether we could see the names of our parents or our friends or our families. And we found the par -- names of our parents on lists that went to Auschwitz [indecipherable] and -- and from what point that was. And we just hoped it -- just hoped that they would be alive. But we sent the cable to the teacher that wa -- lived in our house and we -- and to another friend, and we got a cable back saying that our parents were sent to Poland in the summer of ’42 and they had not returned. And I have several of these cables from different sources. One from the district bil -- building in the village, one from our teacher, who lived in the house. And then also somebody wrote, maybe he did, that our father was taken to Auschwitz and that somebody went to visit him, but when they came to -- when they went to -- I could never understand that because he wrote to say that someone went to see my father and took some clothes to him in Auschwitz, and that when they got there they found that my father and some other men escaped, but that they were captured. But we would never find out any furth -- more about that. And we can’t find the document, we looked for it. We can’t find the document where he wrote this [indecipherable] so I don’t know. But then we decided that my sister, older sister would go back to -- to the village, almost immediately to find -- to see, and wait to see whether he would returned. Now that’s one thing which is absolutely unbelie -- I still cannot get -- believe that I didn’t go along with her, because I-I think we -- we were too afraid. I was too afraid to go back and -- but I wish I wouldn’t have been. I wish I would have gone with her because my older sister was only a year and a half older than I was, but because she was asked by my parents to take responsibility for the two of us, she was of a more -- we expected her to be like a mother to us. And so we decided that she should go by herself. And b -- aside from the fact that we didn’t have any kind of -- we didn’t have any money to go to -- I mean, it was quite a problem to get the money together to send her to Czechoslovakia, or -- and she went by herself and found that no one came back.
Q: When you said no one came back, are you referring just to your family? What about friends and neighbors?
A: None of the members of my family came back, that was -- in the village there was my -- there were my parents, my father’s mother who came from Poland to stay with my parents. My mother’s father and mother -- stepmother, so there were my three grandparents, my aunts, cousins, uncles, none of them came back. Apparently a few young girls came back, according to my sister, that she saw there. She went from house to house. Cour -- course strangers lived in the house and she couldn’t find any of our belongings. She went from house to house and -- and she found that in -- she found a sewing machine belonging to my mother and other items, and the people told her that my mother had given them to the -- these -- to them, and she wanted these items to be given to this -- to three -- to each girls who survived, one family. I think there were well, maybe two girls and she wanted the sewing machine to be given to them. But I think she -- as far as I know, she found everything, nothing. Nobody wanted to return anything. And she returned back to England and then we had to make the decision what to do next, whether to s-stay, what to do. I mean, we had -- no plans were made, we were planning to go back home after the war, but when my sister found nobody at home, we -- she came back to London and then we had to sort of s-sit around waiting to decide what to do next.
Q: When was the full extent of the genocide known in England, and what was the British reaction?
A: Now, I know that it was known earlier, before the end of the war, or during the war, they knew that -- what was going on. At that time, I -- I think we knew already during the war also that things were -- what was going on, but people were not sure and people died. I knew that there were several people who came from Poland telling the British government and telling the world what was going on, but they didn’t listen, obviously. And we were living in a state of shock, not wanting to believe that was going on. But we’re too terrified, I mean I can’t even say sufficiently how afraid we were. And we just didn’t want it to be true, but we knew something horrible was going on. So, how the British reaction? I didn’t ha --
Q: I’m s -- I’m sorry, I have to interrupt you because I’m almost out of tape.
A: Okay.
Q: Just one moment.
End of Tape One, Side A Beginning Tape One, Side B
Q: -- to the news of the genocide?
A: I had very little contact with the British people, first of all. Secondly, I know what we were talking to among ourselves, to each other. We were still refugees. Everybody that I was in contact with were people like myself, and we were just too afraid the terrible thing [indecipherable] terrible things that were going on. But I don’t think we talked to anyone about it. We didn’t. I don’t think -- I mean if -- I knew a few British people, my guardian was British. But we never talked about these things. She never talked to me about it. I -- I guess they were trying to protect us.
Q: What about the newspaper reports and the radio broadcasts and -- and the newsreels?
A: The newsreels? I don’t know. I don’t remember a-any reactions actually, except my own -- I remember my own reaction [indecipherable] my sisters. It’s just --
Q: Were you aware of the public opinion in England regarding the question of allowing Jewish survivors into Palestine?
A: Yes, I think there was a lot of -- I remember the controversy and I remember the people were wa -- when I heard that people were against allowing the refugees to go to Palestine -- I mean, there were some who were for it and some against it, there was a lot of debate. I remember that, but can’t remember details.
Q: Is there anything that stands out in your mind from the -- the period of time toward the end of the war and immediately after the war was over, what -- what stands out in your mind about those days aside from your fear? Is there anything else that -- that comes to your mind?
A: We -- immediate -- immediately after the war? Well [indecipherable] main thing that stands out in my mind was just not knowing what to do next, as far as we were concerned. I mean, I’m talking about personal things. And about what would -- I mean, it was such a very difficult time, I can’t remember exactly. I mean just about up -- us personally, I suppose, abs -- well -- no, I don’t -- well, the main thing was what to do with ourselves and how to deal with how to go on because -- and what to do about go back to Czechoslovakia, stay in England. What do you do? I mean, it was very, very traumatic. So I -- I -- I just hit a blank, honestly, I don’t know.
Q: How long did you continue to work for the Czech government in exile?
A: Well I couldn't -- I kept on -- I stayed on with the government and it was -- the war ended in 1945. In 1947 I received a letter, I think -- no. Wait a minute, no, in 1947 was the annual meeting, second annual meeting of International Monetary Fund in London, in September 1947. And I -- see, right -- immediately after the war ended, most of the people who were working for the Czech government in exile went back, and the top officials went back to -- immediately went back to Czechoslovakia. I forgot, that’s when you asked me what -- what happened immediately after the war. Well, they knew they couldn’t wait fast enough -- to get back to Czechoslovakia fast enough, so many of them, many of the people I worked with and many of the people who belonged to the [indecipherable] Czechoslovakia at the time who were -- I was with a lot, immediately packed up and went back to Czechoslovakia. That was -- also included people like Madeline Albright’s father and the family went back immediately after the war. Many of these people were people that I knew very well because I worked with them. And -- but I didn’t even think for a moment that I would go back. I mean, I was just allowed to stay, so we -- we go, and the exile continued in czecho -- in London and I worked for the ministry, same ministry with Minister Meyer. He was also one that went back immediately. And I -- so in ’47, one of the people who went back, who was a good friend of mine, whose name was Latso Biele, I think he was a Jew, want -- cabled to the ministry in London to say that I was to be assigned to work for the International Monetary Fund conference. That’s how -- that’s how the whole thing evolved. And I was to be assigned to the -- the Czech delegation, which consists of 15 people, the governor of the bank of Czechoslovakia and the executive director for the bank of -- for the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, and he cabled to my boss and said that I was to -- he didn’t communicate with me at all. I was not in touch with him at all after he went back to Czechoslovakia, but he cabled and said that I was to be assigned to work with a co -- delegation coming to London from the International Monetary Fund. It was the second [indecipherable]. And I absolutely refused to go, because I said I couldn’t do it because it was going to be a very high level delegation and it was a -- it was a huge annual meeting, and I was absolutely petrified. I honestly didn’t think I was able to do this job. It was -- and he wouldn’t take no for an answer. I mean, not to me, I -- as I said, I had never been in touch but directly to my superiors. And he said I have to do it. And I said no, I couldn’t do it, I just couldn’t. I was too inexperienced and I was too young and I was too afraid of it. And I said, no I couldn’t. And they said yes, you will have to do it. So I was assigned to work with them, and I went to work with them. There are 15 of them here in London, and it worked out very well, of course. I mean, there are -- it was very good. In fact, one of them said to me, don’t -- why -- would you like to come and work in Washington? And I said -- I didn't know much about the International Monetary Fund, nor did I know anything about the World Bank and I asked him which organization I should apply for and he told me well, he liked the International Monetary Fund better. And so I was sent for a test, and I didn’t take it seriously, I thought I would take a test just to see how I would do, for my own benefit. And I took the test and I just forgot completely about the whole thing, never thought about it again. I never expected that I would be offered this job. But then, in March 1948, when the communists took over Czechoslovakia, I came to the office one day and on my desk was a letter recalling me back to Prague. So all of us who were then working for the Czech government were asked to return to Prague immediately by the communist government. As soon as I opened the letter, I said, that’s the end of my career with the international -- with the Czech government, because I wasn’t going to go back to Czechoslovakia, to the Czech -- under the communists. And I left -- I asked my boss that morning to -- whether I could go and take the morning off, and I took off and started -- went looking for another job. And I came back to the office late in the afternoon having found a new job. And when I got back there was a message from my sister to say that I have a letter from International Monetary Fund. It was -- the whole thing happened the very same day. The Czech government recalled me back to Prague. I found a new job the same moment and in the afternoon I had the letter offering me an appointment with the International Monetary Fund. I was shock, absolutely shock because I never expected to be hire by the International Monetary Fund in Washington, and I didn't really want to come, because I didn’t want to -- by this time I had settled down in London quite comfortably. My sisters were there, my friends were there and I wasn’t going to go by myself to America to start a new job. And I just didn’t want to do it. So I said, oh no, I can’t believe that I got this job, I don’t want it. But then I thought to myself, if I don’t go -- if I don’t go I’ll never forgive myself, I have to try. And so I immediately cabled back to the managing director because they liked -- because since only high level people were hired from abroad, not at my level, and a letter was signed by the managing director and I cabled back -- I cabled back to the managing director of the International Monetary Fund, appointment accepted, which I laughed about for years afterwards, because I thought it was so funny. When I came to the fund I realized that it was a funny response on my part to a managing director to say appointment accepted. But in any case, I did accept appointment for the simple reason that I thought we’ve got to get on with our lives. If I don’t leave London my sister, my older sister will never get -- leave us, we’ll all live together, she’ll never marry and I have to break up the trio. So I decided to leave for America, but I only was going to leave for one year. And I’m here still.
Q: Before I have you leaving England completely, you were still in London --
A: Mm-hm.
Q: -- the end of ’45 and ’46 and ’47 and there was a lot going on. I would like you to take just a moment and -- and tell me, how much did you know of what was going on in Czechoslovakia before the communists took over? How much did you know and how much did the general public know about what was going on in Czechoslovakia?
A: Do you mean in Czechoslovakia itself, or with the Jewish community?
Q: Both.
A: Oh, in Czechoslovakia I knew a lot of was go -- what was going on because I worked -- well, in those years in Czechoslovakia I knew -- let’s see now, when the communists took over in 1948, I knew that the minister, our minister, Meyer, who then became Minister of Commerce -- I can’t remember exactly what he was at the end -- that he refused to meet with Parliament when the communists took over and they beat him up and he was thrown out -- even refused to s -- leave his seat in Parliament. And I remember that he was beaten up by the communists and thrown out of Parliament and he finally arrived in America. He was a refugee just like many other refugees. And I knew that some of the people who returned to Czechoslovakia from the Czech government like Šling and Löbl, many of them were executed by the communists. Some of my friends actually were executed. I don’t know exactly what they were accused of. So well, there was a real struggle within the Czech government in -- in Czechoslovakia, obviously, the communists finally succeeded in taking over. What other question -- what did you ask me?
Q: Also during this time in history --
A: Mm-hm?
Q: -- the war crimes trials began.
A: Mm-hm, yes.
Q: Did you personally get involved at all in any of the trials? I just wanted a sense of how the trials were covered in British press.
A: I did get involved with that, I applied to work at the Nuremberg trials, but I did not accept the job, mainly because my German wasn’t good enough. And I did take a test to work with the Nuremberg trials, actually. But I didn’t get the job and I -- it was a shame because I really wanted to do be there. But -- and I don’t exactly know when it was, but I -- I knew about that, because I followed that, and -- but you know, I can’t remember details any more about it, because everything -- you know, so much has happened since then. How can I remember ev -- all the details? Of course, I did follow it all and well, it’s a blur.
Q: Did you have a sense that justice was served? Did you personally have a sense that justice was served in Nuremberg?
A: In Nuremberg? I don’t know, I didn’t think that justice was served altogether in Europe, because I fel -- I felt many of the people, especially I mean, the people that I would -- in Czechoslovakia, people like Hlinka and Tiso and all the fascists, justice was not served, and all the people who responsible for what happened, how could -- I would, you know, I don’t see how that ever will be [indecipherable]. And in Nuremberg, I guess they did the best they could, anyway. I don’t know. Certainly justice wasn’t served because when I was in Europe this last summer, in Czechoslovakia, in sl -- actually two years ago, they’re bil -- building a docu -- monument to -- they’re building a monument to Hlinka, who was the head of the fascist party in Slovakia during the war. And so I asked them, how can you build a monument to a fascist leader? And they said, well, some people think he was a fascist and other people think he was a liberator because he was responsible for the division, for the -- what the -- he -- they call the free Slovakia. So where is the justice?
Q: Did you get a sense from the British press and the British people around you that they felt justice was served at Nuremberg?
A: First of all when I told you, we hardly any ch -- any close -- we hardly had any contact with British people. It’s very strange when I look back at, because -- well, the only pe-people that I was really close to in Britain were my -- was my guardian. And my guardian was very ma -- [indecipherable] that she was my guardian because he hadn’t ch -- if she hadn’t signed for me I wouldn’t have been in England in the first place. So she did her bit. But they did not really have anything much to do with us. I mean her family. She was very nice to me, I mean she i-invited me to lunch, she gave me a little pocket money. She was in touch with me, but she did not talked about politic o-of siti -- matters of what was going on, generally. And her family had never really done anything for me, that I told you [indecipherable] were invited to any of the things. But -- and otherwise I don’t remember that we had any contacts with any British group. Honestly we just mostly were together with refugees. And of course, among ourselves we talked about these things and we -- when, you know, we discussed what was going on, and in the -- but I don’t know what the British -- except for the few people that I met at the Y -- YWCA, there, and I was afraid actually, to ask them for [indecipherable]. I would not have discussed these matters with them, you know, because I never wanted to hear what they had to say. You know, I was too afraid that they may say things that would be upsetting to me.
Q: By the end of 1945 there was growing unrest in Palestine with respect to the British mandate.
A: Mm-hm.
Q: I was wondering if you can recall some of that time period an-and some of those events with the conflict with the British and the beginnings of the U.N. debate and that whole episode in history. Can you recall any -- anything about that?
A: Well, very little really. I rec -- well, I recall what was going on and I th -- I -- it was a big debate about the -- about Palestine, and I was hoping very much -- of course naturally we were all hoping that we would have a state of Israel. And I just -- I th -- I don’t remember, honestly, I don’t remember how I reacted. I -- I didn’t -- mainly I was -- I don’t remember how I -- how things went. I don’t.
Q: Do you by any chance remember the position of the Czech government on the partition?
A: I think the Czech government, that was very -- now, when I read about it in the -- recently when I read about it, I wa -- Czechoslovakia did a -- had a great hand in es -- su-supporting the establishment of Israel. I think they supplied Israel of -- Israel at the time with planes, tanks. As far as I know Czechoslovakia was great, great help.
Q: Were you aware that there were Jews escaping from Poland via Czechoslovakia, to try to get to the American zone to get to Palestine?
A: No, I wasn’t.
Q: You mentioned that you thought of -- of -- you thought of yourself as a Zionist, but somehow that didn’t happen. Was there a time when a -- when Israel declared its independence that you ever considered --
A: Going to --
Q: -- going over to Israel?
A: Yes, I did. I thought -- during the war -- oh, I -- I thought if my parents didn’t survive that I would end up in Israel -- in Palestine at the time, but in is -- Israel. And for many, many years, I thought that’s where I would go. Of course then things changed because I came to the States. I mean yes, I thought I would go to Israel because I -- my father would have. If my mother had agreed to do it, she wo -- he would left for Palestine in the fi -- in the 30’s, but I think my mother was reluctant to go. And I thought -- I belong to many Jewish organizations -- well, I did belong to some organi -- Jewish organizations in England. I belonged to -- can’t remember the name of it, but it was sort of a farm organization, I went to a camp, Jewish camp. Can’t remember the name. I belonged to Maccabi Hatzair. And I was going to emi -- to go to Palestine -- to Israel. I thought, if I am going to die fighting for anything, I would fight together with the Jews in -- in Palestine. But it didn’t work out that way.
Q: Where did you have citizenship until 1948?
A: Well, when I came out there was, of course che -- Czech. And then I didn’t want to become a British citizen because I didn’t think I would stay in Britain. So I did not apply for British ci-citizenship. So in 19 -- when my passport expired -- when my pa -- when we came to England we had a passport, a Czech passport, okay, Czechoslovak passport. Then I -- probably I [indecipherable] when I -- I -- I came to the States and I had a Czechoslav passports. When that passport expired in ’48 or whenever it was, I -- I had -- I did not apply for citizenship in Britain. And so I traveled on something called affidavit [indecipherable] passport, so I was -- was stateless, because I wasn’t sure where I was going to end up and I didn’t want to just become a British citizen if I didn’t intend to stay. So I debated what to do and then of course I finally be-became American citizen in 19 fif -- ’52? ’ 54? Something like that.
Q: Do you remember when, exactly, you arrived at the United States?
A: Yes, I came in March 1948.
Q: What were your expectations of America?
A: Well, when I first arrived, I came here for one year only, because I thought I wanted to live in England. But when I arrived I was absolutely thrilled because I felt immediately at home in America, and that was much closer to my home in Czechoslovakia than it was -- ever was in England. In England I was always a refugee, and in England I was always -- people would ask me always, when are you going home. From the day we arrived practically, they would ask us, when are you going home. So they never assumed that we would ever stay there. And so we always felt like refugees. And in America I felt at home immediately. There were many things that were very similar to my upbringing at home. So I stayed here.
Q: Such as?
A: Pardon?
Q: Such as? What things were similar? A: Oh, well first of all I was -- I felt comfortable here because there were lots of people who were like myself, from all over the world, okay? Secondly, the food, the e-everything, the people were welcoming and I felt very comfortable. Nobody asked me when are you going home, they said you wouldn’t want to leave, you want to stay here, it is the place to live. And so I felt I was wanted here and I was welcomed here and I wanted to stay here. And so e-even though I came for a year, I almost immediately decided this is the place where I’ll always stay. And after -- but since I wasn’t quite sure what I was going to do, I went home -- I went back to England after one year. And on the way, in a flight going over to England, I made my decision that I would come back here and stay here. So it -- it didn't take long to persuade me to stay here. In England, of course, you know, we were never made to feel -- I mean, I must say, I was very grateful, England was wonderful and they gave us refuge. I mean, America didn’t do that. I mean, we had 10,000 children who were allowed to come to England, whereas in America were hardly any refugees allowed to come, whereas -- so England was very, very good, but they wanted us to come and leave. That was the difference.
Q: Did any of the Americans ask you about your experiences before the war and during the war?
A: I have never talked to anyone about it, ever to anyone. Not in England, by the way, when I lived there, I just didn’t discuss my situation with anyone ever. And then I worked in the Fund for 35 years, and I’ve never talked to anyone about it either. And nobody ever asked me and I never talked -- tel -- told anyone. It’s very strange -- it’s very strange that I’ve never talked to -- well, the first time that this came up was when I went to England for the 50th anniversary -- was it -- the 50th anniversary of the Kindertransport, okay? It was 19 [indecipherable] ’89. I think it was the 50th reunion of the Kindertransport. And we -- when the article came out in “Washington Post” --
Q: Wait, you’re jumping ahead of me, can we --
A: Oh yes, okay.
Q: -- ca-can we wait on that til we get there?
A: Okay. But you asked me about -- what was the question before?
Q: I asked you if anybody in the United States asked you about your experiences during the war or before the war.
A: No, no one ever asked me and I was not willing to tell them, either.
Q: You were in the United States already when Israel declared itself independent. Do you remember that experience?
A: Of course. Of course I remember it. I remember it very well, this great moment and a great thrill, and I was very, very excited about it and I was very sad that my father didn’t live to see the day. And what can I say?
Q: Do you think that the fact that you were in the United States for that event made a difference in your ability to recall the history of this particular event?
A: I’m sure it must have, yes, because I felt that there was great support in -- in the United States for the establishment of the state of Israel. And I felt at home and comfortable and thrilled with the victory.
Q: We’re going to pause and I’m going to change tapes.
A: Yeah, did you know -- End of Tape One, Side B Beginning Tape Two, Side A
Q: This is a continuation of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum volunteer collection interview with Alice Masters. This is tape two, side A. And before I start with your -- your new job in the United States, there’s one question I really want to ask you about wartime England. You mentioned that you never went down to the shelter. Did other people go, and why didn’t you go?
A: I -- other people -- yes, people were -- the undergrounds were covered with people, of course, from wall to wall, lying in the underground a-and people were going to shelters. I didn’t go for various reasons. I suppose I wanted to -- for -- somehow I thought it’s okay to s -- nothing will happen to me. I don’t know how I thought that. And also I felt, you know, what will happen, happens. I mean, I just let it go. I couldn’t face going to a shelter for some reason. But I was -- I went up on the roof -- when I lived at the YWCA, we went up on the roof, and I was a firewatcher. We slept with our gas masks and -- and our -- everything re -- at the ready in case we had to run out of the house. And I would go up on the roof and watch for fires and I had a helmet, a gas mask and I went up on the roof and watched for fires, and -- but I think I had -- I recall maybe I went to a shelter once, when I stayed at my uncle’s house, once. But I -- I can’t remember any other time that I went to it. I just decided it was going to be okay one way or another.
Q: I’d like you to tell me about your new job in America. What was your job title and -- and what were your responsibilities and your duties and all of that?
A: When I was hired to work at the Fund, I was hired specifically for one person who was my boss. He was a -- from Slovakia, he was Czech, he was an economist. He was head of a division, the ce-central eastern European division. And I was hired in a quo -- all of us very, very young and very inexperienced actually, although I had worked for the Czech government, I had a -- I was hired in a high level because I was a bilingual secretary. It happened so that one of the delegates who was -- who I worked for in the 1947 annual meeting was also a -- was a ch -- Czech delegation. He was executive director and he thought that I should work for someone who was a Czech, because at the time Czechoslovakia was a member of the International Monetary Fund, which a -- it was just before the communists. After I arrived in America, Czechoslovakia withdrew from the International Monetary Fund, so we had to be a -- the executive board had to make a decision to allow us to continue to work, even though Czechoslovakia was no longer a member, and we were all Czech citizens. So in any case, I was hired as secretary -- bilingual secretary to the chief of that division. So that I was already a head of a -- I mean, I was his secretary, therefore I was in charge of the entire division. And I h -- there were several other secretaries working un-under me. And I worked with him. He was the [indecipherable] director of European department and then he became director of another department and I -- I grew with -- with -- I was promoted too, as an administrative officer and I could have had other -- I could have changed my position to do -- do other jobs which were more sa -- w-with more responsibilities, but I decided to stay with this man and work with him until he retired. Then I stayed with the firm for 35 years, because they were ch -- exciting. I traveled on several missions. And it was a wonderful job and I loved it and well, that’s it.
Q: When you came here, where did you settle? Where did you first find residence?
A: When I first arrived I was -- I came here, I think the first of April when I arrived in Washington, and -- cause the cherry blossom festival, and the Fund -- at that time there were very few hotels and very few places available and the Fund was very apologetic because they couldn’t get a room for me at a hotel. So they were very apologetic because all the hotels were full and they asked whether I would mind very much if I could spend a couple of nights, the first two nights at the international -- at the international student house. And I was absolutely thrilled about -- with that, because I thought, if I ended up in a hotel by myself I would have been very lonely. But the international student house was just exactly what I needed, and it was just exactly my kind of environment, so I was taken there by chauffeur and I was deposited the international student house, and I was immediately surrounded by students from all over the world including some people who were already working at the Fund. One of them was in the legal department, a lawyer from Holland. One wer -- one was a economist from New York who worked at the Fund, and we -- we’ve been friends ever since that first day that I met them at the international student house and they were both working at the Fund. We’ve been friends for all these years, 60 years. Is it 60 years almost? No, 50-some years. And I was immediately integrated, taken in, the first night that I arrived in America, I was immediately asked whether I want to go to the theater or whether I wanted to go to the ballet, or whether I want to go to concert and I was never free from that day on.
Q: Did you get any additional education in the United States?
A: Well first of all, they asked me what kind of education I had in the -- in -- in England, which was very limited, of course, you know?
Q: That’s on the other tape.
A: Oh, is it? Very limited, very. In America when I started working at the fund, I thought I should go back to school, course. So I went, I registered with the George Washington University for a course in economics. Wasn’t easy, but so when I came to the interview, they said where are your documents, your papers, whether you can come into university? I said, I have no papers at all because all my papers were destroyed during the war. So the person who interviewed me said, that’s fine, you are in. So I went in and I took a course in economics, which wasn’t -- I kept it up I think, for one year, that’s it. And then I was -- got too busy, I didn’t do any more. But I did take economics, that’s about it.
Q: When you came here, did you start to connect with any Jewish groups or Jewish refugees?
A: No, I stayed mostly [indecipherable] the international student house. I did not connect with any refugees. I mean, we were -- you know, I worked at the Fund, I was at the international student house. I tried -- well, I didn’t talk to you about my -- my father was very religious and we went to the synagogue every Friday night and every Saturday morning. When I came to England, I couldn’t go to a synagogue. I just couldn’t face going to a synagogue. It was very painful, so I never went to. And when I did go, I just couldn't believe that people spoke English in a synagogue, because in my village they all spoke only he -- [indecipherable] only in Hebrew, and there wasn’t any foreign words spoken except Hebrew. In England they all spoke English, they were very casual. And so I couldn’t bear being in synagogue, and in any case [indecipherable] be very upsetting to me. And the same thing happened here in America. When I came here, I tried to go maybe to a service once or twice, but I couldn’t face it, and besides, I completely turned against religion, because my parents were -- my father, my mother wasn’t as religious as my father, but my father was extremely religious and I fel -- felt that with all the praying that my father did and all the beliefs that, and this happened, I just couldn’t face going to the synagogue, I just didn’t feel comfortable. But I have struggled with it all my life, I have struggled with that, because I didn’t know what to do. And s -- I never -- I have not belonged to any synagogue, but I always feel I should. And I feel I should and I should and I don’t know what to do and I still haven’t come to terms with it. It’s -- it’s a real problem for me. It’s a real problem for me because I s -- I feel that I ought to belong.
Q: How did you meet your husband?
A: Oh. How did I meet my -- I met my husband in London in 1947, ex -- a-actually I met him exactly during the time of the [indecipherable] because I was going out with a -- an -- an -- commander friend of Peter’s -- of my husband’s, okay? He was -- so I met Peter, my husband, through this friend of mine, and I -- well, actually he saw me off when I was going to America. My friend asked Peter to see -- to help me mi -- make arrangements for my trip to America. So he came along with me to [indecipherable] and made arrangements -- oh, he -- he was with me, I made the arrangements, he just stood by while I make. And then I met him again when he came to the States. He as a Fulbright scholar and came ’49. And when I went back to England after first -- my first year in America, my friend told me that Peter Masters was in New York and he asked me to take a book to him, which I did. I went back again and that’s -- actually we saw each other for the first time, even though we double dated in England during the war -- or, after the war, I didn’t know him during the war, after the war we double dated, we were engaged to different people. He was engaged to an Irish girl and I was engaged to his friend. But then, it wasn’t really a definite engagement because I wasn’t su -- I wouldn’t have left for America if I felt that I wanted to marry him. So I came to America, Peter was here, we saw each other for the first time, actually, by ourselves. We got engaged almost immediately and married shortly afterwards. And that will be 50 years next April.
Q: What was your -- your very brief, apparently, what was your courtship like?
A: You mean with my husband, or -- it was a very brief courtship. Actually, in London during the war, when I first -- when I first met Peter, I had an aunt in London who was at the party where I met Peter, and she said -- she called me aside and she said to me, why can’t you have a boyfriend like Peter Masters? Why must you always have boyfriends like this other man? And so when we met in New York and we got at -- it was almost immediate attraction and we got engaged almost immediately. And so I was able to write to my aunt, guess what? I’m going to marry Peter Masters. Because she said, why can’t you have a boyfriend like Peter Masters, why must you always date these other guys?
Q: You have children?
A: We have three children and actually it’s been very -- Peter and I are ve -- are very well -- I mean, we are very well suited, because Peter and I come from very similar backgrounds, except he comes from Vienna, which is a big city and I come from a little village. But he has total understanding of who I am and what I am and he has enormous empathy in -- about how I feel about things, and understand each other totally. It’s been a very, very good 50 years.
Q: You were a working mother?
A: I was a -- I was a working mother, I have never stopped working, actually. And my -- and my daughters always feel, especially my middle daughter Kim, always actually stayed -- makes a point of telling me how proud she was that I was a working mother, because she thought it was a marvelous example for her. But I always was torn by being a working mother. I felt that I -- it would have been very good for my kids if I could have been with them. But I had a very strong need to work, to be independent because when I was growing up my mother -- my father was, of course, working, my mother wasn’t and my mother wa -- had to ask him every morning she had to ask him for some money to -- to buy groceries and to buy necessities and he would always -- he didn't have very much, you know, my -- we had it -- more than plenty to live on comfortably, but not -- he didn’t have really em -- any kind of bi -- money to s -- extra money to spend. So he would always be -- make it -- there was always a problem and I would watch it and I -- it would upset me to see my mother asking for money. And I said to myself, I will never put myself in that position where I will have to ask for money. I want to be independent. And I just had a need to be not only independent during my working life, because the money during my working life -- my work time, I -- I -- didn’t mean that much. I only wanted to be sure that I have worked enough for my retirement, that I would not be dependent on anyone. So I felt the need to work. And besides, I thought it was good for everybody. It -- maybe it was best for my children that I wasn’t around all the time on one hand. On the other hand, it would have been great to be with the children and I sometimes think that it would have been better for some of my children if I had been around. But that’s how it was.
Q: You mentioned a little while ago that you were conflicted about going back to synagogue and belonging [indecipherable]. What Jewish traditions did you observe in your family while raising your children?
A: We li -- we did observe all the Jewish holidays. Not all, I mean the major holidays. We had Seder. We observed Rosh Hashanah, Yom Kippur and Hanukah. All the holidays we observed, but we did not go to a -- the children not -- did not go to Sunday school and they did not go to -- we didn’t go to any services, except for the high holidays. But we did not belong to any, so we -- synagogue, so we actually had to go wherever we could go. Now, my oldest daughter, Ann married a non-Jew, but she in -- her children go to Sunday school, and she is having her son Bar Mitzvahed, which I am very proud of her that she is doing that. And the other children are consciously Jewish, but they don’t belong to any synagogues either.
Q: I wanted to ask your children’s names and how you selected the names.
A: My oldest daughter is Ann Valerie mas -- Ann Valerie Sedonia. Sedonia was my mother’s name, so she is named after my mother. How Ann? Oh, my grandmother was Anna, or Hannah, and so her first name is and -- for my grandmother. Kim -- my second daughter Kim, her first name is Laura -- oh, there were -- Ann has another name, Ann Valerie Masters. Ann was named after my grandmother and Valerie was the lady at the international student house where we had our wedding. And she was the manageress of the student house, and we named her after her, here in Washington. And Sedonia was my mother. Laura Kim, she was named after no one. And ha -- Tim, my son Howard was named after Peter’s friend Howard. And that’s it.
Q: In your other interview, you spoke about teaching your children morality, and I wanted to -- to ask you to -- to elaborate on what exactly that meant. What did you teach your children a-about Judaism, about morality, about all of those kinds of things that parents impart to their children?
A: Well, we taught our children pra -- to be decent human beings; to have ethics, and to -- to be honest and good people. To be good to each other because my mother always was very -- that’s one thing she always wanted is that we are good to each other. Of course, it doesn’t always work that way with our kids. We’ve had our ups and downs, okay? But we try to set a good example for our children and we taught them to -- not to ha -- be prejudiced against other people. We lived in an integrated community in Washington. We tried to teach them to be tolerant of other people, they -- in fact, we overdid it, because we stayed in a school system where you could hardly s -- find another white face, except my daughter’s, until it was -- maybe it was a little overdone because it was during the upheaval of the 60’s, okay? So our children went through -- we lived in a neighborhood called neighbors incorporated, which was in Washington, D.C., and the school system wasn’t [indecipherable] all the time. But -- and my husband Peter, who is a eternal optimist, thought that we could manage to integrate -- I mean, to balance the schools. But it didn’t work that way, because it just didn’t work. And finally we had to move. But the chil -- our oldest daughter went though the entire school system in elementary school, junior high and high school in Shepherd’s -- Shepherd Park, then [indecipherable] and in Coolidge High School. And Kim also stayed in the junior high in the district and with Timothy, we -- our youngest son, we moved over to Bethesda. But in any case, our children have been brought up to be activists.
Q: You were definitely raising children during a very turbulent time --
A: Yes.
Q: -- in this country. You talked a little bit about the schools and everything, but what about some of the other things that were happening in the 60’s, like the sexual revolution and Cold War. Do any of those big social upheavals of the 60’s stand out in your mind? Did you have any reactions to any of them because of your personal history, anything like that?
