United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Lucie Rosenberg
April 16, 2004
RG-50.549.02*0078
PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of an audio taped interview with Lucie Rosenberg, conducted by Neenah Ellis on April 16, 2004 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview took place in Washington, DC and is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
Interview with Lucie Rosenberg
April 16, 2004 Beginning Tape One, Side A
Question: This is the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, Jeff and Toby Herr collection. This is an interview with Lucie Rosenberg, conducted by Neenah Ellis on April 16th, 2004, in Washington, D.C.. This interview is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum’s post Holocaust interview project, and it’s a follow up interview to a USHMM videotaped interview conducted with Lucie Rosenberg within the last five years.
Answer: Yes.
Q: Not sure of the date. The United States Holocaust Memorial Museum gratefully acknowledges Jeff and Toby Herr for making this interview possible. This is tape number one, side A. When your video interview ended, you summarized a little bit about what happened to you after your family came to New York. But I’d like to go back and talk a little bit more specifically about some of the things that happened to you and your parents and -- when you first arrived there. And y-you mentioned in the -- in your interview that your father went into the mustard business in Brooklyn.
A: Yes.
Q: And tell me a little more about that, how did that come about?
A: Well, he and two other people, one, a man from Belgrade who was actually an electrical engineer, and a man by the name of Rolf, who was a Polish refugee, decided that they had to do something and this was apparently available. At one time my father had a -- wa-was in something -- I won’t say -- s-say [indecipherable] but in the alcohol business --
Q: Mm-hm.
A: -- and in a vineg -- he had a vinegar factory in Liubljana. So, he had some notion of -- of this -- of a very little. And so they were there, I think my father -- I’m not quite sure what year my father sold it out, but it was very traumatic for him, I must say. And particularly negotiations with the union was quite funny.
Q: So these three men pooled their money and bought an existing business?
A: They bought an existing business, yes.
Q: What did they call the mustard?
A: They actually made mustard for various well-known mustard firms, I -- I -- I can’t tell you -- I mean, there were various brands and so on. The thing was called Old Dutch mustard company. And as I said, they -- they -- th-they -- I guess they got the labels and the -- and the -- the -- the -- what would you call them, the containers and so on and they did it for various companies that I don’t remember the name of, but they were certainly better known than the Old Dutch mustard, right?
Q: Mm-hm. And they did that for roughly how many years?
A: Sic -- I’m trying to think. Maybe five, maybe s-six, and -- I mean, my father bailed out very soon afterward, he couldn’t stand it. He couldn’t stand it, he also couldn’t stand driving to Brooklyn daily, and so it was --
Q: Did he go into another business after that?
A: No, I think he mostly invested in real estate and by that time we had already gotten -- he -- he’d started working on -- on this project of getting -- getting the compensation from the Yugoslav government and so on, so --
Q: Mm-hm.
A: -- no.
Q: Can you explain that a little bit, the compensation?
A: Yes. The royal Yugoslav government had deposited in the United States a serious sum -- I mean a serious amount of gold, I guess it must have been ingots, or whatever you called gold. And after awhile the Tito government wanted to -- wanted to get this gold back to Yugoslavia and United States said yes, after you have compensated United States businesses that were there pre-war, and s-some of our -- an-and our citizens, American citizens whose -- whose property was nationalized. And, as they had nationalized a number of things, number of buildings, number of factories and so on [indecipherable] Yugoslavia after the war. We -- we were within this particular group of people. And this went on for several years and finally -- finally a lump sum came, and then I guess mostly he -- he -- he traveled a great deal, he -- actually he did the trip around the world with some friends, and --
Q: And you were in this group of people because of the businesses that he had?
A: Also my -- no --
Q: No?
A: -- no. Simply because, for instance my -- my -- my mother’s house, which is right in the center of Zagreb, supposedly very historic, it was built by her great-grandfather. In fact, this was built -- when this house was being built, Jews were still not allowed to have property, real estate property in Zagreb. But by the time it was finished -- so it star -- it was built under the name of the architect, was a very famous architect by the name of Felbinger. And by the time it had been -- so this was known for years it was a Felbinger house. But by the time the house was completed, this law had been passed in Austria-Hungary an-and they could, you know --
Q: Mm-hm.
A: -- own the property.
Q: Mm-hm.
A: So this was extremely valuable property because it’s in the very center of the main square in Zagreb, and there’s a great deal of -- of -- of -- I mean, this is a small, this is a two story, very old pa -- I mean, house. But the back is very valuable, let’s say like something on Times Square, it -- just the main square in town and so --
Q: Mm-hm, mm-hm.
A: -- just the land itself is extremely valuable and there was another house in the back and so -- so that was one of the things and also my father had -- had some -- ano -- some more real estate property in Zagreb and other odds and ends, and --
Q: So he got involved in this compensation negotiation?
A: Yes, ye -- well, not really. I mean, yes, he -- he did, I mean, he and a lawyer and so on, it took a great deal of time and cu -- and he had to travel to Washington a great deal and so on. But this was done through a lawyer here who -- who -- whose name I don’t re-recall right now, but was an American lawyer who dealt with this and with numerous oth -- not too many, but other people who had arrived about the same time we did, and some a little earlier. Not many who arrived later, because first of all there was this cut-up -- cut off date and secondly we arrived just -- we crossed the border from --from Austria to Switzerland on the day that the -- the -- the -- Belgrade was bombed, so you know, if we had been caught we would have been obviously in bad shape.
Q: An-And was your father successful in that? Did he get his money?
A: Yes.
Q: Mm-hm.
A: It was serious money at the time. I don’t -- I -- I don’t remember what -- what the amount was, but it was a lot of money.
Q: Mm-hm. And when -- when you were first in New York, you mentioned that you were doing some translating and some research at the library --
A: Yes.
Q: -- when you met someone who was affiliated with broadcasting. It was the precursor to the VOA. But can you talk a little bit about your life when you first came as a young person and -- and who were your friends and what did you do and -- and were you happy to be there, were you -- you know, what -- what were your prospects? What did you --
A: Yes -- yes -- yes, I was very happy to be there because -- in a way, of course I was sad, because as soon as we started getting news of what was going on, it was very painful. But -- but there was a lot of hope still going on. There was a government in exile which was [indecipherable] that was in -- in -- in London and then came back into the United States. We th -- both my brother and I thought this was really fun. We arrived in New York and we stayed in a -- in a -- a what do you call it, an apartment hotel, it was da -- it was on 57th and Sixth. It was called The Salisbury, it was like two or three rooms and a little kitchen in a closet, and a -- and of course, you know, they cleaned up and gave you the -- and gave you fresh laundry and so on and there were pa -- I think there were two bedrooms and some kind of a living room and so on. And I remember going to a five and 10 cents store and we bought all of this crazy china, very cheap stuff, and like four plates and four spoons and so on. And it was sort of like playacting almost. Nobody was aware of really what was going on and how it was going to happen. There was -- we knew, of course, that there were Jews being taken to concentration camps in Austria and Germany, but there was no talk of death camps, and there were none at that time, I don’t believe. And so, we were there. Also, at the same time, this gentleman who was in the mustard business with my father, who was from Belgrade, he -- they came -- no, they may have arrived just a little earlier than we did. There was a girl who was about, I don’t know, two, three ye -- two years younger than I am, and a boy who was maybe a year or two younger than my brother. And it was fun. My mother didn’t have the faintest notion about cooking. This very nice Mrs. Shanser taught her to cook. By that time we had moved to a nice furnished place in river -- in Riverdale in New York. Do you know where that is, across from [indecipherable]
Q: No, I -- mm-hm.
A: -- but anyhow, it’s -- it’s almost on the border of Scarsdale and well, Westchester county, or whatever. And they had this very nice apartment building that had a bus taking you to the -- to the subway if you wanted it, several times a day, and to the little grocery, to -- to shopping [indecipherable] was where my mother used to go with this friend who was teaching her how to cook. And however, when we got there, we discovered that there really -- we didn’t have enough knives and forks and we couldn’t function very well with whatever we had, these four spoons and so on. And that place did not have any tablecloth or any -- it -- it -- it -- it was the -- it -- actually, the furniture was quite nice, and it was large and quite pleasant. So then my father went to an auction in New York. And this was a extremely sad thing that I’m still -- that is still terribly painful to me. He went to the New York docks, wi -- where there were numerous cra -- not crates, what you call the -- what do you call these things that you send large amounts of furniture, household goods?
Q: Containers?
A: Contains.
Q: Mm-hm.
A: Okay. And for non-payment of fees at the dock, these things were auctioned off. So he didn’t really know what -- what was in it, but they would say, I don’t know, china and silverware and odds and ends and so on. And he bought this almost sight unseen -- in fact, sight unseen stuff, which then was brought home and I still have it, but this -- now it’s going to go [indecipherable]. Very, very elaborate -- if you want I’ll show you the thing because it’s kind of amusing -- china, which was obviously bought by a family that was moving to the States with you know, what can we buy that -- that -- of German goods that I -- we’re permitted to take out and so on.
Q: Mm.
A: So this is just a lot of gold and a lot -- I’ll show it to you -- thing, which we used for everyday use. I think we were cutting things and so on. I mean, our -- our china at home was very nice china, but it wasn’t elaborate, I mean was -- it was okay, it was --
Q: Mm-hm.
A: -- it was a -- we -- we thought this was really fun, both my brother and I. And then one day -- there’s all sorts of stories about it -- one day somebody said, do you know how much this stuff is worth? I said, absolutely no idea, I mean, this is what -- yeah, this is what we use. Although we thought it was quite funny that it was as -- as -- as elaborate as it was. So finally we decided okay, we need to do -- put this aside. However, later on we did use for slightly better stuff, slightly better occasions, this china. And one day -- by that time the government in exile had -- from Yugoslavia, had left London or some parts of it and were in London -- were in New York. And as ours was really just about the only family --
Q: Intact.
A: -- intact, and you know, we didn’t live in a -- in a hotel, all of these guys whose wives were left either in Zagreb or in Belgrade and whatever, would congregate and come and have coffee with us and -- and kugelhupf and things like that. And by -- I don’t know, this wasn’t at the time, yet maybe it was, that Albina Padovan had come from -- no, I’d -- I’m -- I don’t think so. Anyhow, we were having, I remember as today, there were about five or six various ministers of one kind or another. One of them was the minister of -- of the post office, who was a -- who -- who -- who had gone to the -- to a -- to a Franciscan seminary, but who became the minister of, as I said, of the post -- of post offices in th -- and was a friend, very close friend of my father’s from childhood days. So he was there, and then there was a guy by the name of Gavrilovic who was a -- who was the Minister of Finance. He hadn’t a been, but I’m -- I think he was pre-war, pre -- pre-war, I think he was the -- a congressman in Belgrade. That was Gavrilovic. And there were several others. And then there were some people, some refugees who had meanwhile come from Belgrade and -- via Cuba, which was another way that people were coming in.
Q: Mm-hm, mm-hm.
