United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Hedwig Rose
July 14, 2005
RG-50.030*0496 PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a videotaped interview with Hedwig Rose, conducted on July 14, 2005 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
HEDWIG ROSE
July 14, 2005
Beginning Tape One
Question: Good morning, Hedy.
Answer: Hi.
Q: It’s really lovely to see you after all these years, we met --
A: Right.
Q: -- maybe what? 10 years ago, I think.
A: Right. I think you’re right.
Q: So it’s -- it’s really lovely. Hedy, what was your name -- what is your name now? Tell us your name now.
A: Well, sort of formally and legally, it’s -- it’s Hedwig C. Rose. On my passport it’s Hedwig Cohen Rose. I do have another middle name, it sort of got dropped along the way, which is Hella. So I was Hedwig Hella Cohen, and then became Rose after I was married.
Q: So, at birth you were Hedwig Hella --
A: Right.
Q: Cohen.
A: Right.
Q: Right. And when were you born?
A: February eighth, 1936.
Q: And where?
A: In Amsterdam, in The Netherlands.
Q: Right. Now, I -- I have no idea whether it’s possible to do this, but as we’re speaking, since you were such a young person, if there’s a way for you to distinguish what you really remember --
A: Mm-hm.
Q: -- as that kid, versus what you were told later, if there’s a way of doing that as we speak --
A: Mm-hm.
Q: -- it would be -- it would be very helpful.
A: I think so. Of course, it’s anybody’s guess how accurate I am about that.
Q: Right.
A: But it’s -- it’s certainly true that I am able to at least comment about what I think are later deductions as opposed to early memories, mm-hm. Be glad to do that.
Q: Let’s talk a little bit about your family, your -- let’s talk first about your father, who has one of those longest names that I’ve ever heard in my life. Can you give us his full name?
A: Jacque Theobold Alfred Karl Cohen. Did I leave out one? Oh, Frederick --
Q: Jacque Theobold Alfred Karl --
A: I may have left out --
Q: Frederick.
A: Frederick, right, Cohen.
Q: Right.
A: Right.
Q: Where do all these names come from, do you know?
A: I don’t know because my paternal grandparents had already died when I was old enough to remember anything as a toddler. So I have no idea where they came from. It may also have been the fashion at the time to give people more than -- although that’s not really true because my uncle who was born in Vienna, only had one name. So maybe it had to do with Sephardic as opposed to Ashkenazic Jews. Maybe it had to do with Holland versus Austria. Maybe it had to do with whatever the background of my father’s parents was, which I don’t know. I don’t know what their occupation was or anything.
Q: Do you remember if he was called Jacque? Was he known by his first name, or --
A: Yes.
Q: He was?
A: He was.
Q: And what did he do?
