THIS IS AN INTERVIEW WITH: YM - Cantor Yehuda Mandel [interviewee] NL - Nora Levin [interviewer] Interview Date - February 18, 1982, March 17, 1982, June 4, 1982 Tape one, side one:
NL: Now, Cantor Mandel, would you be good enough to tell us a little about when and where you were born and a little about your family background?
YM: Dr. Levin, I was born in a small town in Hungary called Csepe.
NL: Can you spell that, please?
YM: Yes, I will. C-S-E-P-E. Ugocsa Comidat. That's U-G-O-C-S-A Comidat.
NL: That's the district?
YM: The district. On March the 3rd, 1904.
NL: So this was part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire.
YM: This was part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. It was in the part of Hungary which was the so-called "religious" Jewish part, where we spoke Yiddish and, eh, automatically we learned two, and some of us even three languages when we were small children. Yiddish was spoken inside as soon as we closed the door. From the inside we spoke Yiddish only. As soon as we were on the outside, the language was Hungarian and in some cases the Russian, Maloruski, the Ukrainian language.
NL: May I ask, why Russian? What was the Russian influence there?
YM: Because there, at that part of Hungary, were many, many Ukrainians who spoke Russian, and the pressure was so big, even 50 and 100 years ago, to tear away from mainly Austro-Hungary because they felt that they can't live as nationals. Their culture, their education, their music, their everything, is oppressed by the Austrian government. Therefore, they, in their own homes, just as we Jews spoke Yiddish, so they spoke Ukrainian.
NL: Ukrainian, yes, interesting.
YM: This, then, shows that that was even in many, many years ago a very highly-explosive part of Hungary. If they could have, probably, they would have torn away the part of Hungary from the Austro-Hungarian Empire in those days. This brought another interesting fact. They were completely influenced by the Church. Some of them were Catholics; most of them (the non-Jewish part, we're talking about) were Greek Catholics.
NL: Greek Orthodox.
YM: Greek Orthodox. In both cases, the Church had an immense...eh...
NL: Influence?
YM: ...power and influence over them, and even when I was a small child, I started to go to heder at the age of three-and-a-half. When I was four and five, I knew very well what it means to be attacked by the non-Jewish students.
NL: You already were...
YM: They waited for us with sticks and all kinds of things, and we learned to a degree how to fight them as well. This is maybe an interesting point from a point of view when we ask ourselves, how did the things get to the point where they started in 1938 or '39 in Hungary? But they really and actually started in 1917 and '18 on a big scale when Horthy and his, eh, people, came and killed plenty of Jews in Hungary proper, and whoever could take advantage of Jews, did.
NL: Yes, we want to come to that, because that's an extremely important chapter. This was part of the reaction against the Béla Kun Communist regime, I believe. Now, can you say a little more about your childhood, because this would be so interesting.
YM: I, eh, was born in an extremely Orthodox religious family. My upbringing was the old type of Yiddish upbringing. Eh, and I was four-and-a-half years old, probably, surely not five yet, I started to learn Chumesh [Pentateuch], Chumesh Midrasheh [Post-Talmudic literature], eh, it wasn't a question of, do I want it? There were no considerations as far as psychological questions. This was it, and this is the way we grew up.
NL: Can you tell me, eh, excuse me, par-, I think I interrupted you
YM: We were seven children at home,
NL: Yes, yes,
YM: Three sisters and four brothers, of whom by today only one is alive, who came here in 1913, probably the last boat which reached the United...
NL: 19-
YM: '13
NL: '13.
YM: That's my oldest sister who lives in Philadelphia.
NL: And her name?
YM: Her name is Mrs. Helen Borish, B-O-R-I-S-H.
NL: And can you give me the names of the other children?
YM: Yes, sure. The sister who followed her was Esther. She was married to Yaakov Deutsch. One sister, the youngest sister, died. She was never married. She got what was prevalent in those days in that part of the world, galoppierende Tuberkulose [consumption] and died before the age of 20. Her name was Rivka.
NL: Rivka. And the names of the brothers?
YM: My brothers, the younger brother, is Yoel, Yoel. The one following him is Yisrael Dov, or Srulbear, as we called him, and the youngest brother was David.
NL: David.
YM: Now, my sister's children. Did I give you the name of Esther?
NL: Yes.
YM: Yes, I did. Esther had three children. These children are, all three of them, in Israel, are settled there, and there they live. Yoel, of course, Rivka had no children, Yoel was the first Associate Chief Cantor of the congregation in Zagreb.
NL: Mmm.
YM: He was professor of Hebrew Studies. The younger brother was also a cantor; they were both my pupils.
NL: Is that so?
YM: In Chazanut [studies of religious chants], I mean. We all went to Yeshivot, and the youngest brother, David, David Mandel, died in Israel in 1949. His, he already got his doctoral degree from the university in Budapest, with a yellow star on his lapel. He was a graduate of the seminary in Budapest, and, was a graduate of the university in Budapest.
NL: What a distinguished family!
YM: Interesting, maybe--he was a graduate of the, Hebrew gymnasium in Munkács, and maybe one distinction which does not apply, maybe, to too many people, is that after he went from Budapest because we were so very active in Zionist works--I wasn't home--he was engaged to a young lady by the name Hava Eisdorfer. Their wedding was supposed to take place in June in my Temple in Budapest. I wasn't home, of course, I was in labor camp already in 1940-1944, and it never took place, the wedding never took place, of course, but he went with a Kasztner group...
NL: Ah, yes.
YM: ...to, eh, Bergen-Belsen.
NL: Uh huh.
YM: Not only that, because of my activity in Budapest, while I was there for ten years, my family was called upon to take them along in my absence...
NL: Mmm
YM: ...and that was, that was wonderful.
NL: Oh yeh.
YM: These people who you read in this...
NL: Yes...
YM: ...Yuri Brown story, they thought of it, because my brother was just as active. And my brother came to Israel after Bergen-Belsen. And after all this, and taught for awhile in Gymnasium HaRaeali in Haifa and had an appointment to teach at the university in Yerushalaim [Jerusalem] of all things, Hebrew literature. And, he never reached that day, because he died in Israel in April of 1949.
NL: Now, let's go back a bit. I'd like to know a little about your parents. Can you tell me about father and mother?
YM: Father grew up, probably, the same way as I did. He probably started heder [chuckles] when he was the age of three. He was a real Talmud chochem [scholar of Talmud]. Very knowledgeable Jew. He also spoke these languages, I have mentioned before, perfectly. He had, quite a bit of knowledge in, in not only Sifrut [oral law] and, Talmud and Chumash and so on, but he was a Talmud chochem. As a matter of fact, he was not, though he was an ordained rabbi by his own rabbonim who gave him Hatorath Torah, and Hatorat rabbanot, he never acted, never was, a professional rabbi, but he pasket shayles [decided questions] as they said there, and took care of the Yeshuvim [settlements] all around us, and Avrohom Mandel was, eh, quite a bekovedigger [honorable Jew]. My mother...
NL: Did he, eh, make a living out of teaching, or did he have a separate occupation?
YM: No, no, he had fields and was in the, he was a farmer...
NL: A farmer...
YM: And I, eh...
NL: Were Jews able to own land at that time?
YM: Yes. In those days, yes. My father, who was born in '77, I think, 1877. That was really the golden period of Hungarian Jews.
NL: I see.
YM: Because then, it was after '48, after the French Revolution and so on. And all these countries copied to a degree the French freedom, and so on and so forth.
NL: I see.
YM: And that expressed itself in the fact as well for Jews not to have any restrictions. Jews, as a matter of fact, were allowed to marry non-Jews, for which before they would have been burned on the, you know?
NL: Stake, yes.
YM: But in those days there was freedom. So, you could buy a house. You could get into business, you could, you could own fields and farms and so on.
NL: And so, you grew up on the land.
YM: Yes, absolutely.
NL: Yes. And was the family fairly comfortable, economically...
YM: Yes.
NL: ...or did you have hardships?
YM: You have to know, I mean, if I should go into this, I don't know.
NL: Yes.
YM: That in, in that part of Hungary in those days, let's say my days, after 1904, when I grew up to be at least to understand what's going on, 1910, '11, '12, and '13, '14, and even to '16, there is a river which was never controlled and never, never, put into shape, so to say, which every year brought floods and floods and floods.
NL: Mmm.
YM: My father became a poor man, I think, between 1910 and 1916. Poor. They made out somehow, but they weren't comfortable at the time anymore.
NL: But, eh, the land...
YM: The land...
NL: ...was still his, and...
YM: ...belonged...
NL: ...and was he able to recover?
YM: Yes, some of it, and whatever could be done with it was done. But comfortable, he was not. Before his time, and, of course, my recollection doesn't go back to that, all these land, belonged to my mother's father.
NL: I see.
YM: Eh, and presumably he made a very, very comfortable living. So that shows that there must have come some kind of natural causes which made it impossible for them to be comfortable anymore. My mother, it may be worthwhile to mention, is the daughter of a man who was a teacher in 1830.
NL: Oh my. A teacher in a Jewish school?
YM: There was no school. He probably was a teacher...
NL: Tutoring...
YM: ...in a heder...
NL: Oh, in a heder.
YM: Where, I don't know. In a bigger village, 15, 20, 25, youngsters got together and he taught them the same things.
NL: So she was an educated woman, too.
YM: Ya, she was.
NL: About how many Jews lived in your community, Cantor?
YM: 36.
NL: Oh my.
YM: 36 families, and maybe it's worthwhile to mention that the little community of Csepa had at one time close to 30 yeshivah bachurim in different yeshivot. 30.
NL: Extraordinary.
YM: And this is what pushed us. We wanted to be, to know a little more, and if Chaim knew this much, and got let's say Haftorat Torah, Moishe wanted to have the same thing, and this is...
NL: You were high achievers.
YM: Right.
NL: What were your relations generally with the non-Jewish community? You've told us about the antisemitism of the children, but, let's say, father's relations with his non-Jewish neighbors?
YM: Very respectful. Very respectful. Because first of all they depended on him to a degree. They worked for him to a degree. But let me talk about two particular cases, and I think this would be reflective on what we are talking, and in answer to your question. On one side of our house, because we lived in a house, a tremendous house, the family who lived alongside of us was the Greek Orthodox family. They had sons and daughters living in the same place, but I'm talking about the original family. On the other side they were so-called "Reformed"...
NL: Christians.
YM: Christians. We both, we were in the best of...
NL: Terms.
YM: ...terms. They both, my mother spoke to the old lady on one side in Russian or Hungarian. They spoke to each other, they exchanged views, but we knew that inside, deep, there is a certain hatred because they were extremely devout Catholics, Greek Catholic Christians, and they were immensely under the influence of their clergy. At the time, which I can't remember, at home, we felt that the Reformed Christians, whatever denomination the Reformed movement may belong to, they were a little more lenient.
NL: Yes, more modern.
YM: More modern. We played together with these boys, with the children all together. We sang their songs, we went to the same school...
NL: So, it was a relatively benign situation.
YM: Yes, yes.
NL: There were no antisemitic episodes of violence?
YM: No, and if they are thinking of acts like this sort, let's say, pogroms and so on...
NL: Yes.
YM: ...they were very, very far from our, from our life.
NL: Yes. And what large town were you close to?
YM: We were close to two towns. One is Anagy Szo'llo's, that's spelled A-N-A-G-Y, second word, S-Z-O-'-L-L-O'-S, and our district capital, let's say, was Halmi, H-A-L-M-I.
NL: And did you go into these towns from time to time?
YM: Oh, yes, many times.
NL: Many times.
YM: As a matter of fact, after 1918, when our part of the, our part of Hungary, became Czechoslovakia, I studied in Anagy Szo'llo's. As a matter of fact, my first yeshivah was Anagy Szo'llo's.
NL: I see.
YM: I studied with a great man, a great tzaddik [very pious man], a great man, eh, Yosef Nehemiah Kormitzer. He was my first rebbe in yeshiva.
NL: And you spoke about your going to school with the non-Jewish children. Did you then go to the heder and to a public school?
YM: When I hear parents--and I had the privilege of teaching here in Beth Judah of Logan when I was the cantor for about 18 years--and I hear parents consulting, constantly consulting, how to make Johnny to want to go to school, and to want to do things, I'm always reminded of this, of this episode of my life. We got up at 6 o'clock in the morning, took care of ourselves, even if we were five years old, now took the koss in die hent and gevashen die finger [took the glass in hand, washed the fingers] and gezukt Modeh Ani [and said the morning prayer], and we went to heder. And I will never forget it. And in my profession, many many times it came back, the way we started, to study in the morning, either any one of the Neviim [Prophets], [sings] "wai be mo--eh--ah--" That niggun [melody], that was beautiful, it was nice, and this was the way we studied, and it was no question that the child will be nervous if I get him up at 6 o'clock in the morning. That was no problem.
NL: This was expected.
YM: Right. Eh, we, we stayed there, and davened [prayed], had the morning service. Until 7:30. Whenever we got there, 7:30. At 7:30 we went home to have breakfast. Because no one had breakfast before davening, of course. And we had our breakfast and went to the school, that means, the elementary school, the regular elementary school, where we remained until eleven o'clock. At eleven o'clock we rushed back to our heder and were in the heder until 12:00. Then we studied chumash, that was the chumash period. Then we went back home, had the dinner used to be in Europe, you know, in mid-day. We had, eh, Mittagmahl [mid-day meal], you know, and at two o'clock we were back in the public school. We stayed in the public school until 4:00, sometimes 4:15, and as soon as we were dismissed there, we ran back to the heder...
NL: Oh my.
YM: ...and repeated Neviim and studied chumash. Whoever was ready for it studied Mishnaios, or Gemura. Or whatever. And we stayed there till about 6:00. So this way of learning, and this way of, of doing things is maybe not modern, but I think it was extremely helpful in our Jewish education.
NL: Extraordinary. Such discipline that you must have...
YM: Yes.
NL: ...lived by. And the play time was Sunday, I suppose.
YM: Play time was Sunday or whenever we could find the time for it. Play was not, all work and no play was no problem there. Whenever you could do it, you did it.
NL: Squeezed it in.
YM: Squeezed it in.
NL: Were you musical as a child?
YM: Yes. Musical, not musically educated. I was never musically educated, because I didn't have the chance. There were no teachers. I had a very sweet child's voice as a child. I knew, of course, how to daven. And I will never forget it. I was maybe eight or nine years old when I davened in my, in our own congregation at home in Csepa, maariv [evening prayer], on eh, Pesach, Shavuos, Succot, whatever it was. And eh, and there were, there were those additional prayers, those inserts, we call them marouvis [evening prayers], lel shamurim [prayers at Pesach night], and so on and so forth. And I did very well, I, I knew it was no problem.
NL: Eight.
YM: When I hear people prepare for the Bar Mitzvah a year or two earlier, I'm just angry, because if we were called and we were eight, nine years old, for a maftir [last reading of the Torah], it was no problem. I mean, it was, as a matter of fact the children were called as a rule, because that was the only kibbud [honor] a boy could get in those days, to be called for a maftir [one who reads concluding verses of the Torah portion], because another aliyah he couldn't get; the shevah korim [seven readers] had to be adults. So, we were the additional, an achron [the last], or a maftir, we could be called too.
NL: This was all very natural in the cycle of your life.
YM: Yeh.
NL: And so your childhood was passed quite happily.
YM: Yes.
NL: And, do you have some memories of the war years? Did your family have to move out? Were any, were there any deprivations?
YM: No. In 1914 when the war broke out, as you well know now, I was ten years old. This is just a side line. I remember exactly the spot where I read the first announcement of Franz Josef [emperor of Austria/Hungary], who said, "I have thought it through very carefully. I have given it all the consideration, and we must step in..." and so on and so forth, "the war". The war years I remember very well because there was terrible pressure on all of us. Because you have to know that we lived right underneath the Carpathian Mountains. And the first lines maybe were about 100 km, which is about 60-65 miles away from us. But I remember particularly during the war two years, when people who lived at the very end of the Galician part of Austro-Hungary, had to evac-, be evacuated and evacuated, and came to us before Pesach. What part of the war that was, I don't remember any more, but these people, about 60 families, came into our little community before Pesach, and I will never forget it. Everyone was put up. At families, my father, zichronah l'bracha [of blessed memory], gave a special, gave special permits to use on that Pesach kitniyot [forbidden food]. He consulted with his rabbi, and they gave permission not only for matzoh or potatoes or what, but kitniyot. In other words, vegetables...
NL: Baked beans
YM: Beans which you wouldn't eat normally. So, all these families were put up. I think this was repeated in '15, '16, '15 and '16, because as the war went on, either the Russians pushed the Austro-Hungarians back, or the Austro-Hungarians pushed the Russians back, but the war went on in that part of the world, very close to us.
NL: Very close.
YM: Ya.
NL: But you weren't involved in the...
YM: We were never evacuated. No.
NL: ...war actually.
YM: We had, of course, my mother's brother in particular, you may even know about him, Dr. Moishe Bolgar...
NL: The, the...
YM: Braun, original name. His original name was Moishe Braun. He was a lawyer by profession, and a first rate Hebrew novelist and writer and translator and, so he was at the battlefield all the time.
NL: A soldier.
YM: A soldier. And we were under his, under this pressure that we were terribly scared for him.
NL: For him.
YM: He was like more than an uncle to us. And we constantly were scared. He was then, later on during the war he was the, the man responsible for a military newspaper called Manilova, where he was still in great danger all the time, but at least he didn't have to stay in the first line and shoot at someone.
NL: Yes, and, the end of the war meant changes for your community. The peace treaty. What were the territorial changes that involved your town?
YM: No, first of all, before it came to the very end and before it was decided that our part of the world should belong to Czechoslovakia, or that Czechoslovakia should be called into being at all, there were the--you know that the war in Hungary, especially where we belonged to, that part of Hungary came to an end by the White Revolution, White Flower Revolution, I don't know how that Flower is called, but the Socialist movement became stronger, later on the Communist and here Kun Béla comes in--the one we mentioned before--the Hungary became Communistic. If it was one or the other, especially if it was Communistic, some people suffered from that.
NL: And you were in what sector?
YM: We were in, you mean as a party? The sector of the land?
NL: Yes.
YM: We were in the sector which was occupied once in awhile for shorter or longer periods by the Communist powers, I wouldn't even call it regime, because it was no regime, or when others came who were stronger, so we were occupied by the White, they called them at the time...
NL: The anti-Communists.
YM: Ya. By the Red; by the Rumanians; by the Czechs; by the, you name it, we were occupied by these powers. And this, of course, went on in the end of 1917, '18, up to '19. I became bar mitzvah, as you can see it, in about '19. After my bar mitzvah, I went to study in this Natsalutsch1 [phonetic] yeshivah. At the time when I went in 1919...
Tape one, side two:
NL: Now you were saying that your area was in the hands of a whole variety of occupation forces. Do you have some impressions of any of those particular periods? Did you suffer especially under any particular occupation, Cantor?
YM: I myself as a child, of course, knew very little what's going on.
NL: Yes.
YM: Because finally in 1917 I was still only 13 years old.
NL: Yes.
YM: However, what I remember and, these, I don't know if those are interesting observations or not, I remember, for instance, that we had a dog, and the Rumanians came and shot the dog. My brothers and sisters, they buried the dog and cried for the dog. This made a very deep impression on me. I know that the dog was laying around there dead [chuckling] and they didn't bury him, they wanted me to be home to, to bury him, too [chuckling]. So this kind of childish, eh...
NL: Was this part of the anti-Jewish feeling on the part of the Rumanians, do you suppose?
YM: No, it was rather to make the people feel that they are in charge.
NL: I see.
YM: Now they went from house to house and picked up from flour, from sugar, from chickens, from soap, you name it, and they took it away from the family. So this kind of thing, and this, and they were, it wasn't limited, this kind of activity was not limited to the Rumanians only, to any one who came, with the exception of the Czechs.
NL: Ah yes.
YM: They came well provided. When they came, they came orderly, in an orderly fashion. You know, of course, that the Czechs, many of them, were administrators of the Austro-Hungarian Empire already, and they knew very well how to handle people, most of them did. Of course, in the moment they took over, things started to quiet down, and people knew that if they have a chicken, the soldiers won't come to take it away from them, or, if they had, let's say, geese, fat, or lard, or whatever, not like the Rumanians or the others, they won't take it away from them. Stores started to open up again. Materials in the stores started to appear. Shoes were available. For years no shoes were available in our vicinity. You couldn't get a pair of shoes. I will never forget it. When I went to Nagyhalasz [phonetic] Yeshiva, I still had those little slats made out of wood. This is the way shoes were manufactured instead of soles. So, this, these are my impressions. Of course, what can a thirteen-year-old know...
NL: Yes, yes.
YM: ...in this kind of a boiling world.
NL: Yes, did your parents ever talk to you or to the children about the Bolshevik period of occupation?
YM: In my parents' mind, and I have to say this quite honestly, rightly or wrongly, Bolsheviks, because we were born, grew up, and lived in a different society, whatever was Red, whatever was Bolshevik, was poison. They just couldn't, they couldn't even get to the point, I'm afraid, to consider it.
NL: But this was how most Jews felt, I believe.
YM: I would say so, yes.
NL: Yes, there was a lot to fear.
YM: Yes, a lot to fear.
NL: A lot to fear.
YM: A. The financial standings of everyone were in danger, and second, the religion...
NL: Anti-religious...
YM: ...which was their life...
NL: Of course.
YM: ...which was their, their mainstay, was constantly in danger.
NL: Of course.
YM: And we heard that after, I don't know, we knew about all the troubles, let's say the, the Russian Czar and his family and his generals gave to the Jewish population of Russia, we knew about all that, and we were sorry that they were killed. But Fonya-ganef [Russian thief], as we called him in those days, and as he was called by the people who came to us, eh, we knew very well what happened to them, and we couldn't really, so to say, say kaddish after them. We were sorry as human beings that they were killed, but we knew that religion is out, and no more heder, and no more Mishnah, and no more, no more, eh...
NL: No more property, no more private property.
YM: Right, yes, no more private property.
NL: A lot to fear.
YM: So from this you will see what our emotions and even logical considerations were. Now my father, or mother, never sat down with us to have a political...
NL: Discussion.
YM: Political discussion.
NL: [chuckles]
YM: I mean in those days. Among the boys I was the oldest, but my oldest sister wasn't even there. She left Europe in 1913. My younger sister got married and she didn't live in the same place where we lived. I really did not attend too many, and didn't even have a chance, to get the feeling--just what I heard superficially--and, of course, if Reb Moishe or Reb Chaim said that this is terrible, I had to think it is terrible.
NL: And, and it was. It was. Uh, now in 1918, 1919, what was the political setup that affected your town, Cantor?
YM: In 1918 and 1919, as I said, our part of the land changed owners, so to say, many many times, but in '19 I went to Nagyhalasz, to my first yeshiva. Nagyhalasz at the time, already, was Czechoslovakia. And there was a great relaxation. Our village was divided by the, rather, about four kilometers from our village we had a river called Tisza, which comes from the high, up in the...
NL: Carpathian.
YM: Carpathian mountains. And, eh, flew through, close by to our river, to our village. When I used to come home in the first z'man--z'man is a semester, six months, you know--when I used to come home, in '19 or maybe '20, from Nagyhalasz, for a Shabbes to be home with my parents, we didn't need anything else, but a permit from the, Czechoslovakian police, let's say, or Gendarmerie, or whatever it was, that we are citizens or...
NL: Residents.
YM: ...residents of this and this village. And even if we were stopped, we could pass.
NL: But your parents were technically within Hungary.
YM: Technically, they were within Hungary, yes. Because it wasn't decided that this wouldn't be Hungary any more at the time. When then this other side of the Tisza was, eh, adopted to be also Czechoslovakia up to a certain point, then things relaxed in our village as well. But in Nagyhalasz, really we didn't have this when I got there anymore, because Nagyhalasz, as such, because it was on the right hand side of this river, immediately was decided that this will be part of Podkarpatska Rus, yes, but it will belong as such, eh, to the Czechoslovakia.
NL: Czechoslovakia.
YM: Czechoslovakia. Now you know that Czechoslovakia consisted of Podkarpatska Rus, Slovakia, Moravia, eh...
NL: Bohemia.
YM: Bohemia and so on. So, therefore, this was just a part of it. Where we lived was part of Podkarpatska Rus, all of it belongs, now, of course, to Russia.
NL: To Russia, yes. And did you live with a private family, or did you live in the yeshiva? Was there a dormitory?
YM: This again is a very interesting story. Ich hab gegessen cost-teg ["to support learning" families provided meals for Yeshiva students on different days], if you know what that is.
NL: Yes, yes.
YM: I eat a.. .
NL: Eating days.
YM: Right. Every day at a different place. I was just extremely lucky that my father, as a, a, as the owner of some...
NL: Land.
YM: ...land and so on had cattle to sell, and had sheep to sell, and had to buy things from, eh, materials for the farm and so on, so he had these friends, and I, just by coincidence, used to have my cost-teg at these families.
NL: I see.
YM: As a matter of fact, my sister-in-law, Chava, who lives in Israel, her father was an associate in some way of my father, and I had a cost-tug [singular], a day, to get my lunch or dinner, whatever in their house.
NL: Ah.
YM: So that I knew Chava Eizdorfer even before she was born.
NL: [Laughs]. Very interesting. And this was a large yeshiva?
YM: It wasn't a large yeshiva; it was a much bigger town than ours. As I say it was the capital of this district, Ungvar, and, eh, I will say in Nagyhalasz, at the time probably have lived 350 Jewish, 400 Jewish families. So that was already a big town. Nagyhalasz had a beautiful, big synagogue, of course Orthodox, two, three betai medrushim [class-rooms], and it was a nice, nice town. The yeshiva as such was never big, and was never, there was never a yeshiva in Nagyhalasz in spite of the fact that the great Shmelcha Klein was the, the Rov in Nagyhalasz, it was never a yeshiva town until Yosef Nehemiah Kornitz, zichron l'bracha, came and organized this yeshiva.
NL: I see.
YM: Which consisted always of about 30, 35, less than 40 bocherim [young men]. And mainly youngsters.
NL: Youngsters.
YM: Young people, 14, 15, I myself studied in Nagyhalasz for two-and-a-half years; after that I already went to Ungvar, which was the capital city of Podkarpatska Rus, Uzhgorod, today it's called Uzhgorod. Eh, and the Rov was the chief rabbi of Podkarpatska Rus, Erbavram Yosef Greenwald, he was a haver of my father in his father's yeshiva in Ust. So, I went to this yeshiva to study. After that, in other words, we didn't spend, I don't know, the time in Nagyhalasz until we became ready for, for anything like hora'ah [teaching], or whatever it was. We studied and got a good basic education there. I myself was there, I think, for five z'man [semesters], that means two-and-a-half years. After that I went to--started to study in Ungvar.
NL: Oh my. And, were there any secular studies involved, or...
YM: No.
NL: ...did you have a tutor for those?
YM: In my, of course, in my village you couldn't, even if you did want to...
NL: No.
YM: ...go further than the fourth, maximum the sixth grade.
NL: Grade.
YM: Eh, so that when I came to Nagyhalasz and my uncle--this uncle which I mentioned before, was a great influence--to get some secular knowledge as well, I studied privately. At the end of the season we took our exams in a private way. Let me mention something very interesting. I never in my life had any exercises, any kind of painting or drawing; that was just strange to me. Farbrenggen di tzait oif a solcha narishkaiten [to spend time on such nonsense], who did it? So, at the end, when I was prepared, ya, in Nagyhalasz, there was the middle shule, and the [unclear] it was called, where you could get above the elementary school four grades, four years. So, I wanted to have at least get that what I could. I don't know if my father ever discussed this question with, eh...
NL: Your uncle.
YM: No, my uncle he did, but with my rebbe.
NL: Oh.
YM: Yes, you know, that was a big thing.
NL: Of course.
YM: Hachutzoniyot [outside studies] wasn't simple to study. I don't know if he did or if he didn't, but he advised me, probably at the influence of my uncle, to go to A, B, C, D teachers, prepare with them, and at the end they gave us then, we went to school, that was a day assigned for...
NL: Examinations.
YM: For private examinations. So, the man who gave me the exam in mathematics, and, eh, tziur, eh,
NL: Penmanship?
YM: No, eh, not penmanship, but you know, to...
NL: Composition?
YM: To eh, to draw something.
NL: Oh.
YM: Drawing.
NL: Drawing.
YM: You know, so he said, look, you did quite well in mathematics. You did terribly, no, he said, you did terribly in this, my department and if you will pass mathematics, well, fine, I will let you pass. If not, [laughs] you won't pass!
NL: [Laughs]
YM: [Laughs]
NL: Yah, interesting. So now, you stayed in this town for two-and-a-half years...
YM: Two-and-a-half years.
NL: And then?
YM: Then I went to Ungvar.
NL: That's...
YM: U-N-G-V-A-R.
NL: And that was in Hungary?
YM: That was, that was, that was originally, originally it was Hungary. At the time when I went there it was the capital city of Podkarpatska Rus.
NL: And how do you spell Podkarpatska Rus?
YM: P-O-D, Karpatska as you spell, it's a separate word, of course.
NL: Yes.
YM: Kar-Pat-Ski, just as I say it phonetically, Russ, R-U-S-S.2 And this was the capital city of Podkarpatska Rus. In, at the time, 13, 14, two-and-a-half years, I was about seventeen, eighteen years of age, and I got to Ungvar, maybe even less, I don't know, I stayed in Ungvar for four-and-a-half years.
NL: Still studying?
YM: Still studying, and only this.
NL: At the yeshiva there?
YM: At the yeshiva. There was a yeshiva haramah, it was a big yeshiva. There were 300 bocherim, and there already it was divided in, eh, divisions and sub-divisions, younger bocherim who studied [unclear] just this. As I have mentioned before, maidneshiiur [phonetic] and so on, so, others who studied up to this and this point, later on others who came up to, I don't know, the horaah, who, who stood for the nisayon, [exams] paskan shailles and so on. There was, as I have said, this Erbavram Yosef Greenwald was my father's haver [friend] in his father's yeshiva, and he was one, he was the chairman of the committee who examined for the horaah. Horaah, is you know, all kinds of other things.
NL: Yes.
YM: But among other things it is, eh issur veheter, [prohibition permitted] you know, kashres [dietary laws], and Shabbes and yom tov [holiday] and so on, so, under his guidance, his son, who died here already, in Brooklyn, who was his successor later on, I studied with him, Yehoshua Greenwald, and together we were ordained, if I may call it that, to be rabbonim, and to, that was not yet haturis rabbonis [ordination], it was just to paskan and to paskan shailles in issur veheter.
NL: Mmm Hmm.
