United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Wanda Luos Lorenc
May 7, 2013
RG-50.030*0698
PREFACE The following interview is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
WANDA LUOS LORENCPRIVATE
May 7, 2013
Question: This is a United States Holocaust Memorial Museum interview with Mrs. Wanda Paulina Luos Lorenc, on May 7th, 2013 at the Kosciuszko Foundation in New York City. And I’d like to start, Mrs. Lorenc, by thanking you for coming to speak with us today. We very, very much appreciate your willingness to tell you story.
Answer: I’m very happy to come and tell you what could – happened during the second war.
Q: Thank you, thank you.
A: Not everybody, even has idea how – how people spent this time, in concentration camp, or even occupation during second war in Poland.
Q: Okay, well we – we want to hear about it.
A: Yes. I start maybe when I was born.
Q: Yes, I’d like to know the date that you were born, the place that you were born –
A: Yes.
Q: – and tell me a little bit about your family, your parents, if you had brothers and sisters.
A: Yes. I bor – I was born in Warsaw, Poland i-in 6-22-20 – 1928.
Q: So June 26 –
A: Yes.
Q: June 22nd, 1928.
A: Yes. I was born in Poland in be – I was the youngest from four children. My parents were living all the time in Warsaw, and I was last child. Very happy. My life and family, it was paradise. It was so, so nice, so happy. My parents were very good Catholic and also they love so much Poland, and they tried to raise us as good people, honest people, very good Catholic, and of course good paish – person for Poland.
Q: Tell me, did you have brothers or sisters?
A: Yes, I have – I had a brother eight years older as I was. Later, my sister Irene, and third was my brother Odon Yaizhy(ph), Luos, of course.
Q: Yaizhy(ph) was his name?
A: Y-Yaizhy(ph). Yaizhy(ph).
Q: Yaizhy(ph)
A: And I was in ’28 year one, last one. Very happy family, very honest, very – I can’t tell you, never forget – never – I can’t even tell you how I was so happy.
Q: Let me ask you some questions. First, a few factual questions. To finish with your – your brothers and sisters, your oldest sibling was Yaizhy(ph), and he was –
A: First – first was Zenon Paul.
Q: Zenon(ph).
A: Zenon(ph) Paul.
Q: Zenon(ph) Paul. Then came who?
A: Irina(ph).
Q: Irina(ph). Then?
A: Odon(ph) Yaizhy(ph).
Q: Odon(ph) Yaizhy(ph).
A: And me, Wanda Paulina.
Q: And then Wanda Paulina. So you were four, or five?
A: Yes. Four – four.
Q: Four.
A: Two boys and two girls.
Q: Okay. And your – what was your mother’s name?
A: My mother’s name, maiden name is Chehowska(ph), very difficult to spell even. Anna Chehowska(ph).
Q: Anna Chehowska(ph).
A: Yes, and my father, Pawel(ph) [indecipherable] Luos.
Q: Luos. And were they also born in Warsaw?
A: No. I know that my mother was from north of Poland, Votswavek(ph) or something, big town. And my father was born in – very close to Lublin.
Q: To Lublin.
A: Yes. And during first w-war, they were transferred to the north of Poland. In this time people were taken from own houses, and it was very, very bad time, and the [indecipherable]
Q: Who transported them? During the first World War, who –
A: Pro-Probably it was – I – I tell you, I can’t say to you, exactly.
Q: Okay, you don’t know, okay.
A: They s – they met in this com – place, my mother and my father, and they were married and they came at – after married in twen – first war was finished, they came to Warsaw. And since then, we were born.
Q: Then, another question. Wha-What was your father’s profession? What did he do to make a living and support his family?
A: He was a specialist for special – for machine in – I can’t tell you exactly. Machine in [indecipherable] I can’t tell you.
Q: Okay, but was he a mechanic, a machine mechanic, or –
A: Something like that –
Q: I see.
A: But later he start to wor – oh – he open own place, small factory, and later was made bigger and bigger, factory where it was done everything for dre – not dresses, but from wool.
Q: Okay. So it was a factory that made clothing from wool?
A: Yes, yes, from wool, and later was silk also. And each year it was bigger and bigger. When I was 11 years old and when we start second war, they – they have problem because they wanted to have mo-model for the German people, for the army, to – to make for them – for me it was – I was not interested in th – in this problem, for – I was too young. I know only that Mother and Father, they working very hard, because they lost – my grandparents lost everything what they had. They had barka, that’s in – transport through the river.
Q: Barges, barges.
A: Yes, very big and they had two or three. Therefore – therefore, my parents start from zero. They lost everything.
Q: The – the – your grandparents lost these things during World War II, or during World War I?
A: One.
Q: One. I see.
A: Then my parents met each other, and they start to have family, and start to make business.
Q: I see. Did your mother help your father in the business?
A: Of course, my mother also helped some problem – some work, not for – for herself. She – she always had ambition to have own place.
Q: Did she – would you say that your family was o – was well-to-do?
A: Yes, you know, they very smart and very majestic people. Very Catholic, and they were very happy, and lucky.
Q: Tell me, what do you – when you say they were very Catholic, in what way did they –
A: Which way?
Q: Yeah.
A: Because in – they raise us with like usually you should go to co – to communion, to everything what is in our religion. And later, life was good. What life and never – never be bad, or lie or – or an – not –
Q: Unethical, in some –
A: Unethical.
Q: Yeah.
A: Was good ethical. Therefore we are very happy and very close family.
Q: When you said your growing up years were like paradise –
A: Yes?
Q: – explain a little bit what your earliest memories were. What – what – yeah.
A: You know, for th – me, it’s something was very happy, because after going to church for mass, my father took us for the walk, you know, also, explaining every – almost everything what was interesting. A-And he talk with us and specially for me, in my memories will be all the vacation, when I was in school, and everybody was taken to – with father or mother, because one was staying in – in business, and we spent terrific vacation in the country.
Q: Where did you go in the country? Everywhere?
A: Different – different places. To – to be close with – even Father told us about how is working on – in the country, and about animals, about even flowers or fruits. He – he explained to us everything what was interesting. And I remember that I – because I was the youngest, my father took me on here.
Q: On his shoulders.
A: Yes, yes, that’s very lucky and nice time, which finished with war.
Q: I understand.
A: Yeah.
Q: I want to ask a little bit more about pre-war life. Which one were you closer to, your par – of your parents?
A: My mother was very strong person, and should be order always, and no question what she said should be done. But Father was so sweet, so close with us. He – I don’t remember even one time that he could beat us or – never.
Q: Or yell at you or something.
A: No, no never.
Q: Okay.
A: When he came home for dinner, usually I was sitting on one leg, and my sister on other, and I remember how I was making nice hair of my father.
Q: That’s a lovely thought.
A: This is beautiful time. And also had plenty animals; cat, dog and if – birds. And sometimes some – something like – I don’t remember even name of this animal. We love animal, and –
Q: Did you have a big house?
A: No. On the beginning was smaller, but later – later we luf – in center of old hou – old town, i-it was salon very big like half of this room, and three big rooms; kitchen for – from help – helper, one small room, very big corridor, and then [indecipherable] also big.
Q: So you had a huge apartment.
A: Yes, yes, it – we had apartment in house which belonged to shi – to priest. Not Catholic – they Catholic, but they are from Ukraine and because my father and this priest, they know each other.
Q: So this was a Ukrainian Catholic.
A: Yes.
Q: Okay.
A: And from our room – from our dining room we can see even inside what’s happened in the church [indecipherable]. This church was built like, together with this house. It was very nice and special and very safe, beca-because everything –
Q: Was locked, yeah.
A: – was [indecipherable] yes. I remember when I was not too good, because when one – be-be-before, one step lower – sometimes this pr-priest was looking through the window and I put some waters. And later he said no, no, no. I learned in this time, many things happened. That’s life.
Q: So – so tell me, did you go to school?
A: Of course.
Q: What kind of school did you go to?
A: I – I was very close school e – my father usually took me to school, and it was fer – first, second and third class, and it was in name of Marie Curie Sklodowska, very ne – Marie Curie Sklodowska. You know who is, no? She’s Nobel prize chemist, Polish. She de – she – she found very – Po-Poland – no – difficult to explain here. A-Anyway –
Q: Just repeat her name slowly, Marie –
A: Marie Curie.
Q: Ah, Madame Curie, okay.
A: Yes.
Q: Yes, of course. Mada –
A: Yes, and we had sometimes her doctor was visiting us, and it was big –
Q: Big deal.
A: Yeah, yes, yes.
Q: Okay. Was this a public school, or a religious –
A: It was public school. Very good, very nice, and new.
Q: Okay. Did there – were there children – was it a big school?
A: Very big. Three – three – I think at first, very good, nice and beautiful place, close to center of Warsaw and was very, very good schooling.
Q: Who were your closest friends in the school?
A: You see, I had too many friends, and last year I was sitting with one girl who was Jewish wi – and she had so big hair, black, and I had white. And it was so funny, because they said, one in the dark.
Q: Yeah.
A: But very nice school, and nice – they had very good opinion. But I only pass three – three years.
Q: I understand. About the children in the school, were they – you mentioned that there was a Jewish girl who sat next to you.
A: Yeah.
Q: Were there many Jewish kids in the class?
A: Maybe 15 – 10 or 15 percent of class, but it was so mixed that n-never problem ha – was.
Q: Were you friends with each other, or did –
A: You see, in – with school, n-no, but my parents, because he had a factory with this kind of business, he is – was working very often with Jewish people. And between Jewish and our ha – family, was like friendship.
Q: I see.
A: And sometimes they come for us for the Christmas, and we came for Passover.
Q: Did – were they anybody in particular? A family that you were friends with?
A: Yes. It was this family which my parents save life 12 people.
Q: What is the name of the family?
A: Mawamid(ph). Malamid(ph) or Melamid(ph).
Q: Uh-huh, Melamid(ph).
A: Yes, and it was tragedy, because these people were very honest, very good friend, because when my father, in moment when Germany wants to finished with [indecipherable] he propose to hi-hi – help, especially this girl which was my age, beautiful girl, to take as child. But parents [indecipherable] grandmother didn’t want to be divided all from – from grand-daughter. And they passed away in Treblinka, and they lost life. But parents with sons and other friend and family, they agree, and my father, my mother and my brother, the oldest, because he was about 20 years or something, they helped during occupation, German occupation to transfer them in [indecipherable] to some safe place. And therefore they still were alive. And today – came a day they found us and they sent, during the occupation of Russian, they sent us sometimes [indecipherable] some fruits from inta – Israel.
Q: Okay.
A: It has been – is this friendship from both side. It was very nice.
Q: So let’s go back to when you are in school and you’re 11 years old, and I’ve gotten a sense that you have a happy family, that you have older brothers and sisters, that your – your father’s gentle with you.
A: Very – he is.
Q: And your mother is the one who is stricter. That they work hard and they’re trying to raise you in a very ethical way, very religious way. And that you – that you – your family wasn’t associating only with other people who were Polish Catholics, but that there was a Greek – not a Greek, excuse me, Ukrainian priest, there was a Jewish family through the business, and so on. Is there anything else about your childhood that is particularly precious to you, that you would like to remember?
A: You n – you know, first I was always so happy pi – for my mother, she was hard, sometimes very strong, but she was so religious that sometimes I didn’t like to go to s – s – to –
Q: Church.
A: – to church too much. But you know, she required always to pray, to go to school, to be honest, never lie – liar, or something like that. And she had heart, I don’t matter how you can divide everything what we have with other people. And especially it happens when Germany came to Warsaw, and Polish soldiers were going so unhappy, hu – very hungry. Mother took everything what was supposed to be to –
Q: And gave it to them?
A: Yes. Even dresses or something. She was a very strong person, but I would like to be so strong like her, but I am not.
Q: Let’s start now with the war. September first. Had your family ever talked about what was going on politically in the world?
A: Yes. Sorry, I have to –
Q: Yes please, have a drink, be fine.
A: You see, I he-hear in my family, the parent talking about something what could happened about war. And my parents, especially my father brought to house lot of food: meat and f-flour and rice and – and no – milk in –
Q: Powder?
A: – powder and – and very good, because when s-start in first of September. many people came to us, and everybody was in cellar and my mother prepared food for maybe 20 people, and for us. Bombarding was so heavy, that nobody could do – be outside or in own apartment.
Q: Do you remember the bombs falling?
A: Oh yes, all the time. Can you imagine that I was so unhappy. Five years occupation when bombarding was from – I don’t know who was bombarding, but so many houses are destroyed completely. And later, when I was in concentration camp, very close to Berlin, 70 kilometer only, was two times daily –
Q: Bombarding.
A: – bombarding, but this – you could see like s-silver s – very high, and this bombarding, and in this place where we were was completely dancing. My sister in this time, usually sh-she was so tired after work in factory, that even she fall down from the ted – bed, it was so –
Q: She would fall down from the bunk bed –
A: Yeah.
Q: – because – from the bombardment.
A: Yes, and everything was dancing. I – I don’t know how it could be, only – but Berlin in this time was destroyed completely. Yes, but I –
Q: Let’s go back to the beginning –
A: Yeah.
Q: – of the war. So – so September first happens, and do you remember when you learned that the war is starting? Was it through the bombs falling, was it through a radio broadcast? How did you find out?
A: Of course, radio. We had, and it was all government left Poland, but what to do? Poland was not prepared for war, because we had only twa – 20 years to start to be alone, not divided between our friends, Germany and Russia. Therefore, it was completely too hard even understand why, because Russia is so big [indecipherable] they came first of September came Germany, without telling that we start to – to fight and this is beginning of war. They came, killing as much as possible, bombarding ne – it was a really very hard time. But 17 days later, our friend from Russia came to divide some part for themself. On the beginning they said that, we brought you freedom, we have to help Polish people against ru – Germany. But after a couple – couple months later, they transfer all Polish people to Siberia.
Q: So, but was this in Warsaw, or was this outside of Warsaw?
A: In Warsaw.
Q: The Russians were in Warsaw?
A: No, no, no, you asking about Russian, no, no, they had some part divided between Germany and government – guber – guber – gubern-nament(ph). It was only in a small piece. Some part belongs to Germany, and eastern part to Russia.
Q: Okay. But I want to find out more about what happened to your family and to you, as the war started. So you told me there were bombs falling, and you were in the basement, and that first day your mother fed 20 people with the food that your father had brought. What happened after that, to your family? A: It was very difficult to find bread, because even this places was bombarding them, people couldn’t do nothing, and they didn’t have even flour. Therefore, I remember that my sister – my brother, the oldest, was in an organization which prepared for, from school, after finishing school, high school, and they start to – they send them to – to Lithuanian, I think. These young people. It was very difficult to be there because they wanted to take Polish boys to Russia. And he came v-very – without permission of course, he came back to Warsaw. But my sister was very busy with young people, looking for bomb – bomb – for – they have the j – left bomb – bombing this – for sh – for fl – for – for fire, to –
Q: She wanted to help take out the fires?
A: Yes, and they –
Q: Put out the fires?
A: – they put this bomb outside because in – in place if the bomb start to make fire, that all houses would be –
Q: So your f – your sister, if I understand –
A: She was working with this.
Q: She was unders – she was involved in finding unexploded bombs?
A: Yes.
Q: And trying to – trying to deactivate them?
A: Yes. It was – it was group of young people like –
Q: That’s very dangerous work.
A: Of course, but you see, if necessary, everybody can find some energy and to help, because this is pra –
Q: When was the first time you saw a German soldier?
A: Oh, when I saw first time, I was shocked, because these people looked for me like – because I romantic and I suppose it – like [indecipherable] coming on [indecipherable] with an [indecipherable] and with – and these faces was for me it was terrible shock. But these people who were just sitting in our cellar, everybody was very unhappy because they couldn’t go even to family, because on the street, Germany was ba – very bad to everybody.
Q: Did you see, at that time, any people who were killed? Did you see any dead bodies on the streets?
A: You see, yes, I saw. One part of this house where we were living was bombarding and couple people were dead. But everybody was so shocked and unhappy and afraid of life.
Q: Was this the first time you had seen somebody who was dead?
A: You see –
Q: Or was killed, actually?
A: Yes. They usually were many people pay – after bombarding they lost life in houses. But I don’t remember – for example, for me it was very painful to see how parl – parlay(ph) of our – our king was in fire, and falling down, and I was crying, because I was – my first years I spent so often in this – this park, across the zarek(ph). This is like the mi – nicest Polish –
Q: Well, I’m trying to imagine what it is like for an 11 year old child to have all these things happening around her.
A: Everything fo – was tense, everybody was without an idea what to do. Not food, and no – and people hungry, without families. Everybody lost some – some other people.
Q: What were you most frightened of?
A: I believe I was so close with family that I tr – I – thing that my parents do everything for us. I wasn’t st – in this time I was not conscious even what does it mean? But for me i-is very hurt by to see [indecipherable] mother, how my father were hol – helping other.
Q: How did things develop? You mentioned earlier that your father’s factory had to make something for the Germans. What was it?
A: It was ni – necessary, if s – some factories do something, then government didn’t – government wanted to take some part for them.
Q: Okay.
A: And it was very difficult to do that.
Q: So, if I understand it properly, your father still was able to keep his business.
A: Still, but that is it was not so good as before.
Q: Okay, and – and yet, he had to probably pay either heavy taxes, or give many of the goods up to the Germans.
A: Of course.
Q: Okay, okay. How did life develop for your family, for you and your family, how did life change?
A: A – you see this five – five years was very, very difficult, because was very short of food. Light was only for a couple hours and other place, and then [indecipherable] and we h-have use [indecipherable]. It – it was very, very, very smell – smelling, but instead of light, because light. And food was for people, for example, we can buy, but bread was like greener, like something old, some ny – not – not good, of course. And it – food was only [indecipherable] for eat. If somebody wants to eat, should buy from other people who brought from the country. They kill animal and they bring in. But it was very expensive. Some people really almost dying from hunger. But still, for us, my mother had a difficult to – to get it. And especially giving us lot of sa-salad, green salad, and sauerkraut we made at home, is also – and each Sunday, ea-each morning it was make place with cebula.
Q: With onions?
A: Onion, onion.
Q: With onions, mm-hm.
A: Cut onion in oil, and it was very good against [indecipherable] or something.
Q: Yeah.
A: But I can tell that she tried to keep us –
Q: Fed.
A: – good, and very good, because if not – if she could not do that, we couldn’t be alive in concentration camp.
Q: Yes, but let’s go – I – I – I’d like to understand how life developed, and what happened in your family, where you eventually ended up in concentration camp. Explain this to me. How did things happen, how long were you still in Warsaw? What were you most afraid of, you see.
A: I tell you. In Warsaw was very dangerous, because they keep people from the street, take to concentration camp or to work in Germany, because a soldier were fighting, therefore, for work, they took lot of Polish people. And a lack – lack of food st-stress, because everybody was afraid that they could take me in any minute. Schools was closed. [indecipherable] Only they let – they let to have school for – to – to – maybe for – for class, and that’s it. The idea was to keep Polish people as – only to work, like – no.
Q: Okay, I –
A: You understand?
Q: So – I hope I do, if I will say it in this way, that only children up to fourth – four classes were allowed to go to school, and otherwise all the schools in the country were closed.
A: Yes.
Q: And it was considered that they’re not necessary because all the Poles are good for is going to be to work for the Germans.
A: Yes, it – therefore we had, always living afraid that somebody come, go, and arrest for nothing. In – since this operation start, underground start to work [indecipherable] people start to fight for freedom. And regarding me, I tell you that I lost my childhood, because all the time I was thinking, what I can do for my country. I was 12 - 13 - 14 - 15. But I was too young. I suppose that my older siblings, they probably were in organization, therefore I do what is possible and thank God that my girlfriend was also of the same kind of family [indecipherable]
Q: Which girlfriend is this? Which girlfriend is this?
A: Is – Mishka(ph), like mouse. And she was – she lost a father who was dentist, because he was in an underground and they dis-dissolved this, they keeped, and he’s – he killed him. And so many people was killing without – probably maybe they do something against Nazis.
Q: Mm-hm, the Nazis.
A: Yes, of course, and we’re afraid because we – it was seven o’clock, everybody has to be at home. Light very – not always, food very poor, and only I – we couldn’t have radio. Everybody, if ki – kept radio, could be killed because they afraid of trouble, and so many people was without food, without place for live, taking – seeing something on the street, and asking for money.
Q: How did –
A: This fight –
Q: Yeah.
A: This five years was depression, and so many people so unhappy and dying, and sort of – we had always this – somebody sending to concentration camp.
Q: All right, so explain now.
A: And you know, this situation, wha-what’s happened with me? I was ma – dreaming to kill, in this age to kill German. I was hoping that is comes today that we can – they have to go to own. And in the – my friend, I – I told you, Mishka(ph), she took – she tried to take me to organization, and it was organization I didn’t know even what kind organization, but somebody – I’m looking all who can fight with Germany. I suppose it’s my part – my – my parents helped German – Jewish people, but my brother oldest, second brother was in – ah, sorry, it’s too, too far. Everybody else supposedly is helping and is belongings to – to some organization.
Q: But your family – you – you didn’t know if your parents were, or if your brothers were, or your sister –
A: No, because this is – I oath never talk, and even save – give my life for freedom of Poland. And everybody was –
Q: So this was – so this was an oath that you took?
A: Yes, of course.
Q: And what was Mishka’s(ph) last name?
A: Bidderman(ph).
Q: Bidderman(ph).
A: Yeah.
Q: Was she Jewish?
A: Nie. No, no, no. She – she was not Jewish. I think that this German.
Q: Uh-huh, okay, a German name, but she was Polish.
A: Yes, yes.
Q: Okay.
A: And do you know, when I was 15 years old, maybe not completely, not – just before 15, I oath.
Q: You gave the oath?
A: Yes.
Q: I have a question. Did your parents ever talk to you in general terms, not in specific terms, that they wanted or did not want you to join the resistance, or the underground?
A: Never.
Q: They never said?
A: They – they knew, because Mother and Father, they knew, they can understand that what we dreaming, what about we dreaming. And they – they didn't tell us don’t go, nie, that’s –
Q: Okay.
A: You know, idea for my parents was God, love for country and freedom for Poland. They – they raised us this way, and therefore never ask us. And I knew that everybody was somewhere. In this time, they organize small group. It was three girls in my age, and one older person, and they teach us helping for wounded people, or to be connection, to make connection with other places. And later, in the future, they started to sh – look and t-to use pistols and –
Q: Excuse me? To use pistols?
A: Yeah. But in this time when we finished these courses, it was maybe half year, is that first [indecipherable] uprising. Then my son – my brother, this – yeah, yeah, this [indecipherable] on –
Q: What’s his name?
A: Yaizhy(ph) Odon – Odon Yaizhy(ph).
Q: Odon Yaizhy(ph).
A: He was working – he was fighting in middle – middle Warsaw, but our house was in old town, and thi-this organization, this is Polish [speaks Polish]
Q: Say it in Polish. Say it in Polish.
A: [speaks Polish here] I can’t explain.
Q: It’s okay.
A: Anyway, I was in this organization, but between organization was also not good connection, and they didn’t prepare propap – proba –
Q: Properly.
A: – eb – pro – yes, they didn’t prepare everything perfect. Armia Krajowa [indecipherable] underground army was very big, but [indecipherable] where I was smaller. But this was start impossible to go, because all street was on – Germany was –
Q: Blocked?
A: Yes, closed. And first we had to make, oh how – pla – took to put something against army – Germans, they come t – come –
Q: You mean a barricade?
A: Barricade, yes. And everybody who – who was alive go to bra – barricade against Germany.
Q: That’s right.
A: But each time was more, more and more fighting and bomb – bomba – bombarding. And we start – we lost water, even, we didn’t have water. We were looking where a pump from other place, and this bombarding was so hard. And Germany, they tried from higher houses to – to have –
Q: Shoot?
A: Shoot to – if somebody was – but our boys, our soldiers who was fighting was heroes. They la – they lost life, but they fight t-to last one ammunition. Why? Because we do it for freedom of Poland. We – we can lose life if we can help. You see and it was [indecipherable] everybody was so happy, so excited. We put flags and very – e-everybody was very happy that good something happened, at least. And specially because Vistula –
Q: River.
A: – our river, divided War-Warsaw, and on other side of Warsaw, after r-r-river, army of Russia came and stop. They didn’t want to help. Stalin probably said, I don’t know what’s the bandits want do then, and we’re not interested in this. And we supposed – we were in ma – dreaming that they will come and we can be helped. But Stalin was first – and this was first person who were the same kind as Hitler, maybe worse.
Q: Tell me – so you were helping with putting up barricades?
A: Yes, of course.
Q: And you were trying to help wounded soldiers?
A: Yes, and you know what I used?
Q: What?
A: My tornister for book when I was going to school, I used for books. On this I put a red –
Q: Cross?
A: – cross, and I took everything what was possible from my mother. If was not enough, she was cutting linen as bandages, and I was taking this bo – this tornister, and I was going – I tell you how – how, it was smart. Between houses, when house and house were together, they make in the cellar, opening, because it was impossible go to the street.
Q: Right.
A: And people can go to this opening to big party of houses. And I was going with I – there was – whatever I could have, and I was going to private people, because many pri – [indecipherable] was wounded. Therefore – and later when start be fight was very, very strong, and so many boys they brought from fight, therefore I was sitting with this boys and helping, you know, as much as possible. My sister did something else, and you see, for me to start to see dying people, I was 16 years old, very young and very still romantic in this time, but I – I lost this five years of my life; was not sport, no pleasure, not food, no friends, no – you know, it was very hard, and I was too young for what I found in my life in this time. And especially when I saw that boy, I remember he calling, Mama, Mama, help me. He died, yeah. Sorry.
Q: That’s okay. It’s okay.
A: And it was not first time. Later it was more, I was start to be more stronger, but on the beginning I remember first man who was ki – here was, and other place –
Q: You mean he was wounded –
A: The wounded, and I put something, and I – I remember how I was –
Q: Shaking.
A: – shaking. For 16 years old, it was too much. But I was happy that I can do something.
Q: Yeah.
A: You see, that – this church what I told you that in this beginning we were – we had apartment. Under this church was place where this wounded people that boys, they brought. It was lot of work, but it comes the day when all the town – old – old town for – was taken by German people, they came, SS with plenty other people who’s different – different –
Q: Uniforms?
A: No, not uniforms, but faces. Not like – I can’t – I can’t tell you even
Q: Were they hard? Were they angry faces? Were they –
A: Yes, and every – especially German, they something probably like after alcohol or something completely th-this – eyes was like not normal people. Probably they – they gave him to be strong and – and this house – this voices, raus, raus, and you see, everybody, they came with – if somebody was too slow, they kill immediately. And this all group took Polish people out. And they, on the street they put six people here. But my mother was very smart, she – she supposed that in this situation, especially young years are very danger.
Q: In danger.
A: In danger, yes, and she – she gave us old yi – dresses, something very cover, very dead on the face, something close –
Q: Okay.
A: – and they look like old babushka, you know and thank God that she did it because when this group was going to Pruszków, there is one place where is – from Pruszków, people were taken to concentration camp. On the – on the way, couple kilometers, many soldiers, this I don’t know who was, and Germany not, but the – the [indecipherable] people, they took young girls to ruin. They rape and killed immediately.
Q: Which – who did this?
A: Excuse me?
Q: You said not Germans, but somebody else.
A: Yes, they looked like, with hair. Sometimes they tell that they are Lithuanian, but not this, but from Asia, something like. Th – I’d – I can’t tell you who was, but the –
Q: But they were helpers of the Germans?
A: Mm-hm, yes, it was –
Q: But they didn’t have –
