United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Berek Dafner
September 12, 1994
RG-50.030*0283 PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a taped interview with Berek Dafner, conducted on September 12, 1994 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
BEREK DAFNER
September 12, 1994
Q:Stating your name, where you were born and what year.
A:I'm born August 27, 1916 in Sosnowitz, this is Poland. That was on the border from 1916 there was a war, and there was a triangle over there: Austria, Russia and Germany; it was on the border there. In 1918 after the war, Poland was (Un)occupied from Russia and they have their own countryPoland.
Q:You know what, I need you to state your name for the record.
A:My name isI was born Berek Dafner in Poland. Now I change my name here in AmericaDov. Dov is a Hebrew name for Bear.
Q:What was your family life like before the war? Tell me a little bit about the town and what your father did.
01:02:00 A:My father had a store; leather suitcases and briefcases, skis and sleds. It was a good business. My father had three children. I have a sister; lives in Floridaone in Israel. I'm in the middlethe only son. The style in Poland was comfortable for us. The most people were poor in Poland; eighty percent at least. I lived comfortable and I was a sportsman; I have time. I use to play soccer, summertime, all over Poland, and I played table tennis, wintertime, because I have the money. I wasn't exactly a professional soccer player but they pay you some money. Of course I didn't need it. The poor people were playing, they pay more money because they don't have it.
Q:Were there a lot of Jewish people in your town?
A:Oh ya, there wasthe population was, Sosnowitz's was 150,000 but 50,000 Jewish people were killed.
Q:Now were the Jewish people integrated into the rest of the community? Were most of your friends Jewish?
A:In Poland, even on the street we were walkingin the main street in SosnowitzSaturday, walking back and forth the Polak they were walking other sideJewish people on this side. Never integrated, because you can get a job that's in hospital or to work in an office... never they took a Jew. Never. They only worked, shoemakers and tailors and carpenters were Jewish people working. They, always the Polak said, oh the Jewish people had the money, like over here they saideven in America.
