Interview with Ruth Feist Series Survivors of the Holocaust—Oral History Project
Interviewer—Ann Hurst Date of Interviews: 5/14/1979
Q: This is an interview of Mrs. Ruth Feist by Ann Hurst.
A: I am a 60 year old female. I was born in Mannheim, Germany. I lived there all the time I was in Europe. My parents had lived there ever since they were married, which was in 1914. My father lived in Mannheim before 1914. He met my mother at a convention. They got married subsequently and lived there all the time they lived in Germany, until they left in 1940.
Q: You left in 1940?
A: I did not leave in 1940. I left in 1934.
Q: You left in 1934? I see. How many brothers and sisters do you have?
A: I have one brother and I had one sister.
Q: Any other family members who lived in your home?
A: An aunt lived with us for a good many years. She was a sister of my father’s. She was an unmarried lady. Although she had an apartment of her own early in my childhood, she was fairly ill and therefore moved in with the family.
Q: When did you leave? When did you come to the U.S.?
A: I left in Jan. 1934 and came to the U.S. at that time, directly.
Q: What language was spoken in your home, mainly?
A: The only language spoken in our home was German.
Q: What was your father’s occupation?
A: He was a teacher, a grade school teacher.
Q: Did your mother have an occupation?
A: My mother had been a high school teacher before she married. She gave up all work when she got married.
Q: What was the education of your parents?
A: My father attended normal school, and so did my mother. This was about the normal education for a teacher in those days, in Germany.
Q: The religious life in your home, what were the practices?
A: We were an observant Jewish family. We observed all the Holy Days. They were joyous occasions in our house. We were traditional Jews. We were more interested in the ethics of Judaism than in all the observances. We were not orthodox. My father felt very strongly about the ethics of Jewish teachings and was relatively unconcerned with some of the minor observances. He felt that these minor observances were sometimes not necessary, or very relevant. He had strong feelings about ethical living and the tradition of living of Jews rather than just observances which he felt were often not connected to anything that was not intellectually active.
Q: Did you and your family attend synagogue on a regular basis?
A: Yes, we did.
Q: Did your parents keep kosher?
A: Oh! Kind of! That means within limitations.
Q: You celebrated the Sabbath?
A: Yes, we did, we celebrated the Sabbath and all the Holy Days.
Q: Were the males in your family bar mitzvahed?
A: Yes.
Q: Did your parents speak any language, other than German?
A: My mother spoke some English because she had lived, for a short time, in England in her girlhood; I suppose in her later teens.
Q: Did you think yourself amongst the rich or the poor, in the community?
A: We did not think about it very much. We had everything we needed. My father was a state employee. He earned the necessities of life. We were never considered rich, but we certainly were not poor.
Q: Did your parents associate socially with non-Jews?
A: On a limited basis. On a very limited basis, however they had some contacts.
Q: To what extent was the synagogue the center of Jewish life?
A: It was and it wasn’t. It was the center of religious life but not of the social life of the community.
Q: The synagogue related to you pretty much as it did to the community?
A: Yes, that is right. The synagogues were a place for prayer, they were not necessarily a place for social activity. I believe that is the difference between the synagogues here and the synagogues as they were in Germany, at that time.
Q: What activities or associations did your family engage in other than religious associations? By that I mean: theater, politics, music in the Jewish and in the non-Jewish community.
A: My father was very happy with music and I was probably the child which was the most interested in music of us three. We attended theater performances, concerts, we went to the museums, that was about it.
Q: Can you think of anything else, in your general background, which would be of interest, at this time? Anything which you would want to include.
A: Yes, my father was writing a book, when I was a young girl. He was writing about the history of the Jews in the German State of Baden, in Southern Germany. That is where we lived. He was doing a tremendous amount of research on that. It was published in 1928, I believe (and reprinted in 1981). As I was growing up, I was very much aware of what he was doing because he used to take me on field trips with him. We went to cemeteries (it used to be customary to write brief summaries of peoples’ accomplishments on headstones where they often were preserved while city halls were often ransacked and/or destroyed while soldiers fought battles in the XVII and XVIII centuries), and city halls to get source material for the book (he succeeded in tracing one Jewish family by the name of Weil back to the 1360th). We usually connected this research with some kind of excursion or hike or something, maybe an overnight stay in an inn, which was really interesting and fun.
Q: About your childhood, how would you describe your childhood?
A: Happy! Very happy, very satisfying, very pleasant, secure, good, nice all the good things.
Q: Are there any special events which you recall?
A: My brother’s bar mitzvah was a very special event because a lot of the relatives from all over, came. Plans were made months ahead. It was a really festive occasion. That was one of the good times which I can remember.
Q: Did you attend school?
A: Yes!
Q: Secular school?
A: Yes! Public school, strictly public school, both Grade and High school.
Q: What other language did you speak at this time other than German?
A: None other than English.
Q: To what extent did you associate with non-Jewish boys and girls in school and outside of school?
A: Yes, I played with non-Jewish kids in the street.
Q: Prior to the war and/or the Nazi (National Socialist party which was the official name of the party lead by Hitler) occupation, to what extent were you aware of anti-Semitism?
A: It was with us.
Q: It was with you! And did it affect you personally?
A: Nothing physical. Some slurs and slurred remarks, innuendoes; it was something which you more or less lived with constantly. It was below the surface. It was never terribly overt, but you knew that it was there.
Q: Were there any laws or any ordinances which affected you, because you were Jewish, considering that you left Germany before the Nuremburg Laws (the anti-Jewish laws which were promulgated by the Nazis in 1936 at the party conclave held in the city of Nuremburg, in Bavaria).
A: Yes, shortly before I left we were supposedly thrown out of school (it was no longer allowed for Jewish children to attend instruction together with non-Jews).
Q: Otherwise said it affected the educational system?
A: Yes! My father also was forced to resign his job (Jewish instructors no longer were allowed to teach non-Jewish children). Things were just beginning to be very noticeable when I left.
Q: Do you recall incidents of anti-Semitism in your school?
A: Remarks, you know and slurs, again innuendoes and unpleasantness. They had the beginnings of Nazi rallies at street corners.
Q: Newspapers?
A: No. No, I don’t believe so. The “Sturmer”, the newspaper of the Hitler party, was not very well known in the city where we lived. Mannheim was a city which did not take very kindly to Hitler, in the beginning, and was trying to stay away from him, in most things. I mean that they did not try to stay away in all aspects, but it was not one of his areas of most support, in the beginning. However there were street corner rallies and brown shirted men (the SA or Schutz Abteilung, meaning Protective Section wore brown shirts and coats as uniforms and were the average uniformed Nazis) who were meeting and marching and gathering and fighting with other people (at the end of the “Weimer Republic” the supporters of various political parties would fight with each other in the streets). We were told to stay away -- go far away from them-- and to get home as quickly as we could, when we saw anything like that.
Q: Were you told this by your parents?
A: Yes. That was supposed to keep us safe, to keep us out of harm’s way.
Q: What was the response to public or private incidents of anti-Semitism? Let us say by anything other than the Jewish Community?
A: There wasn’t any, I believe, at least none that I knew about. Of course I was pretty well politically unaware, at that age.
Q: Did you notice any response from your family to these incidents?
A: If I remember right my father tried to appeal his dismissal, as being unjust and uncalled for etc. However it didn’t do him much good, even at that time, which was the very beginning. So he accepted his retirement. He was not too far off from retiring anyway. He felt that it was probably just as easy to do that.
Q: Were there any neighbors who responded or reacted to any of these instances in the beginning? any non-Jewish neighbors, I mean?
A: Not particularly, to my knowledge. It was early, you see. People were just beginning to realize what was happening. I mean, non-Jews and Jews alike were still very insecure in getting used to what was really happening. Nobody really knew at that point what was going to happen, who was doing what to whom and why, any of that. That came much later, really.
Q: How about your peers?
A: They fell into the same category. One girl said to me: “You are not supposed to be in school anymore! Are you?” However she was not sure either. It was one of these things where nobody knew what was happening. It was all very new, all around.
Q: Do you recall when your town was occupied by the Nazis?
A: It wasn’t. People in all these towns and cities were beginning to form a Nazi party. Also Nazis in the cities and towns were beginning to build a political organization. (Hitler came to power when his party, and those who allied themselves to his party, commanded the largest number of deputies in the German parliament, the Reichstag, not before). You see Mannheim was never occupied by anybody until the Americans came in 1945. (There is a short time Allied presence followed WWI).
Q: Of course, you were in Germany. That was a bad use of the word. What I meant to say was: “The people who belonged to the Nazi party began to show themselves!” Would that be a better way of putting it?
A: Not exactly. This was not a sudden thing. They had been showing themselves right along. Gradually, very gradually, this developed. Obviously this is my memory of it.
Q: How did this begin to affect your family? That is before they left. In your everyday life, in your family’s everyday life such as shopping, religious life, business life?
A: School ended around Christmas time for me and I left Germany in January, so I had about two months. Not very much happened to me in these two months, which I am aware of. There was no difference in shopping, at that point yet. There was really no difference in anything at that point. It was just beginning to get organized. It just did not happen all at once. I left before all these bad things really happened. So, you see I don’t have that much of a story to tell.
Q: Your family left then shortly after this?
A: Let me see: I left in 1934; my sister left for England in 1936; my brother went to Munich, the former capitol of Bavaria) and he was in Munich, working, and didn’t leave until 1939.
Q: Your family didn’t leave together then?
A: No! No. Everybody left at a different time.
Q: Would you like to explain that, please? Just exactly how that came about.
A: OK! My farther had two sisters and one brother living in NYC. When things began to look bad his younger sister, who was married and had two children, two girls, wrote to him and said: “Send one of your girls to us, for safekeeping and who knows what else. Let us help you that much. We will let her live with us and we will get her to finish her education. Then we will see what she can do from thereon in.” That was me. I left in 1934.
Q: Before we go any further! I have been remiss, would you please tell us what your father’s full name was?
A; Berthold Rosenthal.
Q: And your mother’s maiden name?
A: Johanna Renzian.
Q: Sorry for the interruption! You were then situated in NYC in 1934?
A: Right. Then I finished High School and went to Nursing School. Then I started to work. I went into the U.S. Army.
Q: You went into the army?
A: Yes!
Q: At what time?
A: Not until 1945.
Q: Let us go back then and pick up the rest of your family.
A: My sister, Lotte, took some kind of schooling for mentally retarded and disturbed children and worked in a home, a little bit north of Mannheim. Then, when things got fairly difficult she left and went to England. We had some relatives there. She worked as a babysitter and children care person, in private homes. (England would let people come in only if they belonged to certain categories; students, nurses, maids and butlers only). In 1939 or 1938 she came to the U.S. She also lived with my aunt for a little while, until she found a job. My parents stayed in Mannheim until 1940. When things really began to go terribly bad they wanted to leave to go to Berlin. From there they wanted to go to Sweden, where my mother’s brother lived. He had emigrated there. He had some connections to Sweden from WWI. However my parents were denied a visa to go through Finland, which they would have had to go through (Finland was then fighting against Russia). Then they were allowed to go through Spain and Portugal. They flew down there and then took a ship from Portugal and came to NYC. (RF was by then a U.S. citizen so she could demand that her parents be allowed entry into the U.S., outside the regular quota, which quota prevented many would be immigrants from receiving permission to come to the U.S.).
Q: Did all of the family finally get together then?
A: Yes, in NYC. Yes we were all together.
Q: Congratulations!
A: Yes, it was nice, that is that we were together, except for my brother. He was not with us.
Q: I see.
A: My father and mother had actually decided to stay in Mannheim. They had talked about it. They were happy about where they lived. They were retired and my father kept doing genealogical research, he also kept writing papers about his research. They were satisfied, but of course they were in danger. This was between 1936 and 1940.
Q: In other words, they lived a rather quiet, sedentary life, out of the public eye.
A: Yes, and the city of Mannheim, as I said previously, was not a hotbed of Nazi activities. It was an industrial city. Its political climate was just that way. I believe that that has been documented officially, at least up to a point, of course. You know that, of course, it contained plenty of Nazis and there were plenty of difficulties and people from Mannheim got deported. My father was arrested and sent to some kind of jail or camp, I believe out of town, near Karlsruhe, which is a little south of Mannheim. Later he was set back home again, because he was over the age limit. The age limit, at that time was forty or forty-five.
Q: What year was this?
A: Probably in 1938, or something like that. (This is a correction of what is on the tape).
Q: Was it considered a work camp?
A: No. I remember that it was a jail. It was sort of a processing center of some kind. He was told to go back home and that they didn’t have any provisions for people of his age. He came home then and he was not arrested again.
Q: At what point did they decide that it was time to get out of Germany?
A: When people were beginning to be deported into the camp of Gurs, in Southern France. (That camp had been set up by the French government for “Germans” prior to the fall of France in May-June 1940, not far from Marseille. It was in the area of France which was controlled by Vichy, the so-called “Unoccupied France”. It was used by the Germans as a staging camp from which emigration out of Europe was not only possible but even encouraged. Those who did not manage to leave Europe were later transported to death camps.) They realized that the Jewish people round them, in their neighborhood, in their own city, were being deported. Then they knew that it was time to leave and they went to Berlin then. If you were not home, they could not find you, you see, that was a device which many people were smart enough to take (the Nazis arrested people by coming to homes or apartments listed for individuals) so, you see, if you were not at home and no one knew where you were, they could not find you and they could not arrest you. My brother did that. He rode his bicycle for the entire day in Munich during the day following Kristallnacht (the night of Nov. 9-10, 1938 when all over Germany synagogues and stores owned by Jews were ransacked and torched), when they were arresting people, so that he would not be home where they could find him. When they couldn’t find him, they could not arrest him. There was a whole lot of luck connected with it, but it didn’t necessitate only luck; it also involved planning. For example, if you weren’t around when someone knocked on your door, you weren’t there, and they had to keep on looking for you. Then, if you were lucky enough to be able to hide until things settled down a little (maybe they had filled their quota of arrests), you might be able to keep from being arrested. However my parents had planned and they packed up everything which they could carry in a couple of suitcases; they even packed their household goods.
Q: Did they, at this time, I realize what was happening to the people who were arrested?
A: Yes. Whether they knew of the ovens (the actual extermination camps, including the ovens actually did not come into production until 1941/42) and extermination, I am not 100% sure. However they knew that things were not going well. I am not quite sure that they knew the real gruesome details at the time.
Q: In 1940, how did they plan to come to this country?
A: They had planned to go from Mannheim, to Berlin, to I believe that they had said Finland and then Sweden and later to the U.S. They did not get the Finnish transit visa. I believe that the Finnish government was afraid that too many people were going to stay and they were concerned that they could not absorb them (Finland was also in a war with the Russians). That is what I was told. Therefore, since they could not go through Finland (WWII had started before then with the German invasion of Poland in Sep, 1939) they could not go into Sweden. Therefore they had to change their mind. They had a lot of rearranging to do in Berlin. They pulled all the strings which they knew how to pull and paid a certain amount of money to get a transit visa to fly from Berlin into Madrid. I believe that they sailed out of Lisbon, Portugal.
Q: Now this visa which they paid for, whom did they pay, what visa was it?
A: I do not know. I really don’t know.
Q: Did your parents, at this time, have any knowledge of what was going on in the world at large?
A: Not 100% obviously, but yes, in general. However they were well enough informed to know that things were really happening all around them. They were very worried, yes indeed!
Q: Now, what knowledge did you have as to what was going on with them?
A: I was about 95% informed about what was happening.
Q: How?
A: Through letters.
Q: Was your mail censored?
A: I wouldn’t be surprised if it was. I couldn’t say officially that it was, but I am pretty certain that there was some interference with foreign mail.
Q: How about on the other end? Was your mail to them censored?
A: The same supposition exists, but again I have no real proof. They never mentioned it but it was taken for granted that mail was not foolproof.
Q: Now, what arrangements did you make in order to help your parents come to the U.S.?
A: By that time I was a U.S. citizen so that I could ask for them, outside of the immigration quota. That was part of the law of 1921, revised in 1927, which stated that children could ask for their parents. My uncle, who had helped me come over, consulted a lawyer, all the forms had to be made out. These were forms going back and forth. (that is how they got their visas very quickly, after they decided to leave Germany).
Q: They then had entered Spain with some German paper? Were they forged papers or were they legal papers?
A: To the best of my knowledge they were legal papers (you could not have received Spanish, Portuguese and U.S. visas except on legal documents excepting for legerdemain). I don’t believe that they were forged. I am almost positive that they were not forged.
Q: Then from Spain, the request by you for them to enter this country outside of the quota was made.
A: No, that happened before Spain. That happened while they were in Germany, that they had their immigration permits for the U.S. I think that if they hadn’t had those, they would not have been able to go into Spain or Portugal (they could not even have purchased the tickets). That had all been taken care of ahead of time.
Q: How did the experiences which you had affected your religious beliefs?
A: I believe that my religious experiences evolved. They didn’t happen all at once. I told you that I was brought up to be fairly observant didn’t I? That I was brought up to be more interested in the ethics of Judaism than in the observances of Judaism, although we enjoyed, I mean that we really enjoyed, the Holy Day festivals and things like that. That was because they were family centered, and we were a warm family.
Q: Do you feel that as a result of this you were not disappointed in your religion?
A: No, I was never disappointed in my religion. I don’t believe that my religion ever let me down. I felt that human beings do things to each other which are outside of a true religion; you know that the less marvelous part of human nature comes through. I don’t believe that this has anything to do with religion.
Q: You feel that your religious beliefs have evolved. Have your practices changed a great deal?
A: Oh yes! I would think so, in some ways.
Q: Do you feel that that is because of your experiences or just a normal evolution?
A: It is more apt to be a normal evolution.
Q: Again, you came to this country in 1934.
A: Yes, I came at the end of Jan. And I started High School about four or five days later. I finished High School in about two years. I graduated in 1936. Then I worked for a year as a babysitter and things like that. Then I went to nursing school. I stayed there for three years. I got licensed as a RN (Registered nurse). Then I worked for another year at the hospital where I had trained. Then I worked for the U.S. Public Health Service in NY State. Then I went into the army. I was in the Philippines for a year. After I came back, I started college. I went to NYC (New York University) and graduated one full year later. That was little more than one calendar year. Then I worked for the Visiting Nurses in N.Y. By that time my parents had moved to Omaha, Nebr. Because my sister who had gotten married and opened a restaurant in Omaha with her husband, had a small child. My parents went out there to baby sit because the hours at the restaurant were so long.
Q: Your parents were retired?
A: Yes, they were retired. My father had worked a little for one of his cousins, while in NYC. Obviously living in NYC was boring and they could use the money. The income from that job wasn’t bad. He actually lived on a German pension. That is an interesting part: They paid him his pension, Nazi or non-Nazi.
Q: They continued to pay him the German pension?
A: Yes, that is what they lived on.
Q: That is interesting.
A: Yes.
Q: Very bureaucratic!
A: Yes, very! Bureaucratic to the nth degree. It was just sickening actually and senseless in some ways. I could even call it idiotic. This was a good deal for us, so I can’t knock it. He worked long enough in the U.S. to collect Social Security. When they lived in Omaha, they lived with my sister and did the babysitting and helped bring up one and then two children. Then everybody was happy you know, everybody was on their feet. I worked in Omaha for a year or two and got a Master’s Degree from the University of Omaha. Then I worked in Iowa for a couple of years and then got married. Shortly after we were married my husband got a job here, in the Miami Valley. That is how we got here.
Q: What is your husband’s name?
A: Robert Feist. We have been here ever since!
Q: You moved to the Miami Valley in what year?
A: In 1954.
Q: And your family?
A: They stayed in Omaha.
Q: I mean your own family. Do you have children?
A: Oh yes! I have two daughters! I have a daughter Bette and a daughter Debbie.
Q: What are their ages?
A: Bette is 24 and Debbie will be 22. They were both born in Dayton. Debbie is still in College and Bette is out of College.
Q: How would you compare your life and your family’s life in the U.S. with life in Europe or can you make such a comparison?
A: I don’t really think that I can compare. You know that you get introspective when you speculate what would have happened if you had continued to live the way you started without Hitler, without anything. I often felt that with all the agony and all that, I personally came out pretty lucky. I mean I, as an individual. Nobody can truly say what would have happened in Europe if the Nazis had not reached power. It is hard to say. Here the society is much freer. The opportunities are much greater. Individual advancement is much easier. You would have to pay me to go back and spend more time there. I really mean that, because from what I see and hear it is a much more restricted life. I verified that the one time I was back there. As I said, I personally came out fantastically well, in my own individual way, you know just considering me and myself, and of course my family. I, personally considering how horrible the situation was, I am well ahead of the game, really -- in all ways. This definitely is my own opinion, and I may be wrong, but I don’t really think so. From all that I know and gather I rather live here. You know that they say that the German mark is better than the U.S. dollar, at present, but German living is not as happy living as American living. That is just my own personal feeling.
A: Have you been back to Europe?
A: Once, and then not to Germany at all. We went to see my brother, who emigrated to Israel. That was our primary reason for going. When we all came to the U.S. he decided that he would go to Israel. He left Germany in 1939. They took a little boat down the Danube, then a boat which capsized in the Black Sea. It took them nine months to get from Germany to Israel. He said that this was his rebirth, because of the nine months. In Israel (Palestine at the time) he was interned by the British, as an illegal immigrant. He finally made it out and he is very happy now. We are going to visit him again next month. He is married and has children, and all that. He came out good too. However it is difficult to say what all would have happened to us.
Q: How often do you go to synagogue now?
A: At least once a month, occasionally more. However we do attend lecture series at Temple, when they are in session, every week on Sunday mornings because we are very interested in them. We also are involved in other ways. Actually we go to the religious services on the average of about once a month. We do attend some Holy Day services, the ones for the more important Holy Days, very faithfully. The less important ones, we do not attend so faithfully. I occasionally attend services over where I work. There they have services on all Holy Days and I participate in them once in a while. (RF was, in 1979, Director of Nursing at Covenant House, the Jewish Home for the Aged of the area of Dayton).
Q: To what extent do you feel that the synagogue is or is not the center of the Jewish Community life here, in Dayton?
A: It is to a great extent. I think that it is to more of an extent than the Jewish Center, which is supposed to be for the entire community. A synagogue is a strange place. I think that most Jews would say that you have to have a synagogue even if they never attend it: they would still say that they want to have a synagogue. They would feel, even the most unobservant and the most irreligious individuals, that there should be a synagogue, even though they don’t go. It is one of these things which should be there and we need it and we must have it. It is a paradoxical sort of a thing. I feel very strongly that there have to be synagogues. There has to be continuation, perpetuation, that is important. It is a good ethical system which Judaism represents and it should not be lost.
Q: With whom do you usually associate, Jews or non-Jews?
A: With more Jews than non-Jews. Yes!
Q: How have you found Jewish and non-Jewish life different or similar to those of your European experience?
A: Oh, I can’t compare it! Absolutely not! I left when I was 15 and I am now way past that age. I have no way of comparing an adult situation with a child’s. It wouldn’t be right. It would be meaningless.
Q: Do you ever think of your former life and how do you feel about it?
A: I very rarely think about it. It seems like a terrible far past.
Q: Will you ever visit Germany again?
A: I have no great desire to do it. We will go to France and we will go to England and we will go to Greece this time, and we will go to Israel, of course. If we go across the river, which is the Rhine (that is the border between France and Germany in the area of France where RF intended to go) into Germany, it will maybe on a business matter which my husband is connected to, but not to sightsee. I have no real desire to sightsee there. Germany is a beautiful country but I have no great desire to spend time there. If I would ever go, it probably would be to visit cemeteries, because my grandparents, and all kind of other relatives are buried there. (After this interview was concluded RF looked back at old records of the family with the following results: On her mother’s side she traces her ancestry to grandparents three and four generations removed being born in the Hamburg, Berlin and Silesia area -- on her father’s side the records go back five and six generations, back to the 1680th, all pretty much being born and dying in the area 50 miles of Mannheim, but then her father did the basic research on the question from Mannheim).
Q: How do you view your children’s lives as different from your own?
A: I think that everyone who has ever lived, really lived, in Europe realizes the difference between the freedom and the openness and the permutation of the democratic spirit which exists in the U.S. versus Europe. I know that we laugh at it -- and we think that it is so imperfect -- but nothing in this world is very perfect -- but if you really compare and you really live it I think that you realize that it is very much different. I know that all the people who are dissidents and malcontents and dissatisfied, they don’t know, they really don’t know how good they have it. They really are selling themselves down the river for nothing. Again that is only my own opinion. I am really not blind to all the things which should be improved, really not, I really see a heck of a lot of things which ought to be better, but at least you can try and so many times you get there. We talk about classes, this, in the U.S. is basically a classless society compared to what you have in Europe. There you cow-tow to this one and to that one. In the Orient it is ten times worse. When I was in the Philippines it made me ill; they used to do our laundry and practically bowed from the waist for the permission to do our laundry. I used to say: “For goodness sakes, get up!” I don’t know; I am not a super patriot but I sure feel that there is an awful lot which is good here. Even though there are some things which are not that good, which could be improved, we have a good thing going.
Q: What portion of your life would you choose to pass on to future generations?
A: I think the nice childhood which I had before the trouble started. I have often said to myself when I see so many people who are maladjusted in life and have hang-ups. I mean had hang-ups! People who can’t cope with life and who can’t do anything. They get so hung-up on things. I have often thought -- I mean that if I do any praying -- that I thank God that I had parents who had their feet on the ground and were wholesome, had wholesome personalities and were able to make our childhood secure and give us a good background. They made us want to grow up as normal human beings. They gave us the capacity to grow up as normal human beings. I believe that this is a great heritage and I wish it on every child. That would be great. We would have no problems, or hardly any problems. Those are the things I would like to see passed on to future generations. Hopefully I have done this to my children. I would like to pass this on to other people, to anyone for that matter. It is something very nebulous; you know, hard to give it to other people.
Q: Thank you Mrs. Ruth Feist, that was beautiful.
