United States Holocaust Memorial Museum Interview with Rosalie (Chris) Laks Lerman December 1, 1998 and January 13, 1999
RG-50.030*0396
PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a videotaped interview with Rosalie (Chris) Laks Lerman, conducted by Joan Ringelheim on December 1, 1998 and January 13, 1999 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview took place in Washington, DC and is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies.
Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
ROSALIE (CHRIS) LAKS LERMAN December 1, 1998 and January 13, 1999
Q: Good morning, Chris. Welcome to Washington. A: Good morning, Joan.
Q: Can you tell me the name that you were born with, and where and when you were born?
A: I was born in Starachowice, Poland, March 5th, 1926. My Hebrew name was Rachel. My given name on the birth certificate reads Rozalia Laks. I also was known as Rozka or Rosha Laks, and during the war, when we were brought from the Auschwitz camp to Ravensbrück, I had decided that it would be easier to survive with an assumed Christian name, and due to the fact that no records have followed our departure from Auschwitz, when we were on the death march, once we arrived at the table where they registered the new transports, we changed our names to a Christian name – last name and first name in my case, the name Gorska – I assumed the name Krystyna for it to be a real Christian name.
Q: So, you have many names… A: Many names.
Q: …in your life?
A: Right.
Q: Can you tell us about your family – your father, your mother, what they were like, what they did, and then about you and your two sisters?
