This is Irene [Stangroop?] Interviewing Mr John Weiszmann from Maroubra on the 1st of April, 1990, for the 12th hour Oral History Project .
This is the first side of the first tape.
Right Mr Weiszmann, can you state your name please? John Weiszmann . I live at 23 White Avenue, Maroubra. What was your date of birth?
29th September, 1926. Your parents’ nationality? Hungarian.
Where were they married?
Where?
Where?
Where? In Budapest, somewhere.
Did you have any brothers and sisters?
I had one brother.
What happened?
He died in Mauthausen .
Do you know the date?
As I found out, probably it was the 10th of May, one day after the Americans liberated them.
What did he die of?
Probably of starvation and - who knows?
What was your father’s occupation?
He was a timber and veneer merchant - wholesale and retail.
Tell me how much were you involved in Jewish culture life in [Ujpest?] ?
Well, very little really. Because, well, in those times, someway, we didn’t have much religious teaching. Didn’t have much religious teaching.
And we were always Jewish. We kept all the holidays and so on, but that was as far as it went.
So you didn’t actually went into some special Jewish company?
No, no.
All my friends were Jewish but not in any organization.
Did you have any Christian friends?
Well, there were a few, but none of them very close.
Yes, and . . What was like to grow up in Hungary in this time?
Well, I can speak of myself. We had no problem before the war.
Well there was some anti-Semitism - now and then some unpleasant remarks and all that but that was all.
We were in good financial circumstances so we really didn’t have any problem ‘til just about ‘44 when the Germans came in and took over Hungary. And then it started.
That was 19th March?
19th of March.
And what happened when the Nazis began to arrive actually? Did you sort of feel anything before?
Before? Yes, well it was unpleasantness but nothing more. So let’s say it didn’t touch us very close.
Your father’s business was in [??] Not before that. Not before that.
He could keep his business right up to the Germans came in??
Yes, yes.
And what about at school?
At School there were some boys who spoke up against the Jews, and it happened that I hit them.
You had fights?
Yes, but nothing serious really.
And your parents you say were not affected by anti-Semitism much Well as far as I know, not very much. So it was mainly unpleasant. That’s about all I can say.
Do you have any special education. ? Jewish education?
Jewish education no.
Just what the… Just what We had some Jewish education lessons in the school. As the best one hour a week. That was all. And of course I studied for my bar mizvah. I had my Bar Mitzvah Did you know about Jewishishness besides eh. . ? Yes, yes well we were very much Jewish, all of us. Yes, you know everything er. . ?
Yes.
And when did you have initial contact with Nazi occupation? Only on the 19th of March?
19th of March, yes.
What was the nature of the encounter?
Well, I was still attending school and the fact was that the German soldiers were standing on the street catching people. And we had to go on side streets to avoid them. And well that was it.
And they were standing on the main street?
On the main street. And as I said, I had a few proper nice Christian boys and they went ahead and came back to tell “Go the other way”.
What did they do, the Germans, when they caught the people?
Nobody knows. They disappeared.
They disappeared?
Well as far as I know. I never heard of them again.
Did you have any responses from Gentiles, or any reactions from them? Besides your school mates?
Besides…Not really only the anti-Semitism came out more than ever. Because they were free, completely free to express their real feelings. That’s about all.
Yes, and just tell me what happened in 1944 to your life?
In 1944, nothing special til the Germans came in. At that time. .
I mean after the Germans came in.
When the Germans came in I was still in school. They came in on the 19th of March. I had my matriculation on … if I remember well on the 22nd of April. I already had it with the yellow star on, and after that. . three weeks after the matriculation I was called up and taken to Bor.
Yes. What was the date then?
I seem to remember it was the 21st of May when I went to Vac.
Were you taken to Bor by the Germans or the Hungarians?
Well the commander on the train was Hungarian, and I didn’t see a German soldier on the train. So it must have been the Hungarians.
What was the commander like?
Oh, well I think I saw him once when the train stopped and everybody run to the water. And I heard him saying – “These filthy Jews always want to wash.” That’s about all I can say about him. I remember his name [Karoly??] .
Do you know what happened to him?
No, no. I don’t think he was a bad man. He didn’t do anything bad on the way. So there was nothing special I can say about him.
What about the other soldiers who were looking after you or guarding you?
Well there was one soldier in our wagon. We had to mind his gun. He was an old man and he had no idea what’s going on in the world. An old peasant. He didn’t have the slightest idea where we are going, what was going on.
Weren’t they told?
Obviously not, or if they were told, he didn’t understand. Very primitive, but he was OK. As long as we left him alone he left us alone.
How many were in the wagon? You were in a cattle wagon?
Yes, in a cattle wagon. It was full. I would say about 70 or 80. So, when we lay down for the night, everybody had to turn the other side together, otherwise – no go.
What was your sanitation?
There wasn’t any. The door was open a little bit and two people held the third one out. Hanging out.
What about food?
Well we got very little, but we had some food from home. So nobody was hungry in the way out. It took if I remember rightly it took about five days to get to Bor, but we were not really hungry then.
So you arrived to Bor five days after you started out.
Yes on a …they changed it to a narrow gauge railway in Serbia. It was an open cattle wagon then.
We stood there, stacked up. And we arrived and we went through a gate and the first thing was the gallows. The rope was hanging with a noose there. That was the first thing we saw there.
And then we had to stand up there and came the commandant.
Hungarian or?
Hungarian. Murai. And he pointed at a mountain and said “You see that mountain? You won’t go home before you level it”. Well we didn’t take him seriously. We were number one young and didn’t know what goes on very much. Number two we were expecting the partisans every minute. Because we saw their work all the way. All the trains were blown up. And we saw a peasant riding a horse next to us, had a good look at us, went away, and we went through, while all the other trains were blown up. They knew who we were.
So what happened then?
So we were waiting for them.
And we kept waiting and waiting and waiting for four months and then they came and they liberated us.
So in eh. . Did you actually eh. . That was your first place, your first labour?
Yes, that was the only one really.
And you were 18 years old?
Yes I was 17 then. I was . . We left Bor. .
They said they were taking us back to Hungary.
Yes but we are talking about when you were drafted into the labour camp.
I was 17 then.
You were 17.
Did you actually know where you were going, or rather, that it was a forced labour camp you were going to?
A forced labour camp. That’s what we know. We never heard of Bor before.
But you knew that it was a labour camp you went to?
Oh yes,yes.
I see. And. . How many Jews were there?
In Bor?
No, in your place, in…Your um. .
Town? In Ujpest?
No. How many Jews were actually in Bor where you were together with?
Oh in Bor? Well, in our. . There were different lagers there.
In your unit I mean?
In our unit, about 250. 250? Roughly, roughly.
Were [all ] Jews there?
Well there were Jews or there were some who were well, Jews who converted to Christianity. They had white arm band instead of yellow.
But not real Christians?
Well not born Christian. Or perhaps they were born, perhaps their parents were Jewish. So anyway they were considered Jews by the Nazi laws.
And tell me what was the attitude of the officers towards the Jews? In Bor?
In that camp?
In that camp.
Well we had one Hungarian officer there who had only one important problem there - -how much is there to drink? Otherwise he left us alone. I don’t even know if I ever saw him at all, only from far. Our commander really was a sergeant who was an idiot and a sadist.
A sadist?
Yes he was beating the people.
Why?
Because he enjoyed his power. Simply, that was the simple reason. He was caught after the war mind you, and got 15 years.
Do you know his name?
[Sbrunek??]
What nationality?
Hungarian.
Probably some Yugoslav origin, sounds like it, but he was Hungarian.
Did somebody report him? Or how was he caught?
Oh well I don’t know. Only, we were back in Budapest and I heard the story that he was caught and he got 15 years. I don’t know how he was caught. I don’t know the details.
Where is actually Bor? Could you tell me exactly?
Yes, in Yugoslavia there is a corner where Yugoslavia Rumania and Bulgaria meet. And it’s in that corner. So we saw the English American aeroplanes every day by hundreds every day above us.
We knew if they go north it’s Rumania, if they turned south, it’s Bulgaria. Some way they always turned above us.
But they didn’t bomb you?
Never. They were shot at. And actually I remember they shot down three aeroplanes,
Where?
Above us.
And they bailed out, we saw the parachutes coming out. The Germans run to catch them, [but] they never found them. The partisans were there already.
Who was shooting?
The Germans.
So you were surrounded by Germans?
Oh, the German army was there. Of course.
And you didn’t have anything to do with the Germans yourself?
Yes, we worked under the German Todtist organization.
What is the Todtist?
That was the work organization of the German army. So we worked during the day with them, and every evening they gave us back to the Hungarian commandant.
And how did they behave towards you?
We never had any problem with the Germans, only the Hungarians.
Is that so?
Well they wanted you to work, but as long as you worked it was alright.
In fact it’s very interesting that the boss of the … I don’t know his rank you know, of the Todtists there…was a very nice man from Vienna, who found a man among us who was his boss before the war. And he helped him in any way.
And well, it was a good custom with us that if any Todtist came . . well, we tried to sleep a bit. If any Totist came whoever saw him he shouted “Odon!” . And one day this boss came and nobody noticed him and so he arrived there and he shouted “Big Odon!” . So he was a very nice man really, and he… Odon was the name of that man was it?
No, it was just a silly Hungarian name. It was just a code name that somebody is coming.
Ah yes.
And actually he comforted us that it won’t last long.
Bor had a reputation actually that it was one of the worst labour camps.
Well, for some people. Because some people worked in the copper mine, and that was very bad.
We were building a railway. Which wasn’t that bad. It was hard work and well we didn’t get, practically food, at this time. So we were very hungry. But I don’t think it was too bad there. Well, er, we had I think seven people died in the camp.
What from?
One probably died of starvation.
Weren’t you actually fed enough?
No, no it was practically nothing. But the main problem with this man was of course again, he was a very religious Jew. And he only ate something … anything which was kosher.
In Bor.
In Bor. Which was actually against the religion because save your life was the first thing. So anyway. . The other six died in a storm. They were swept off the mountain. Terrible storms there.
You actually had to climb up the mountain?
Well it was all mountains. Terrible up and down and we worked in the mountains. Building that railway.
Inside? In the mountain?
No. On. Through the mountains. Up and down. And of course we had no shoes. That was the first thing, they took away our shoes, so. .
What was did you put on your feet?
Barefooted , or some, oh, wooden how do you call that - thongs you would call it here, but very primitive.
And sanitation? How was it there?
Well it was - in the camp - latrine.
What sort of camps were you in? Was it a proper. . camp, or building?
Well there were two buildings there. A third one was for the guards of course, which was the only proper building. Well it was full of bedbugs, lice and fleas. But when I say lice, it means that you could grab it by the handful really.
You didn’t get sick with the typhus?
Well luckily we were there only for four months. Perhaps that’s what it is. But, actually, strangely enough there few sick people.
There was a bad thing, of course, this lack of vitamin. And I remember that I was in the sick bay too at the end, because I couldn’t stand on my legs – they were full of sores, which didn’t heal. It was lack of vitamin.
Just the same when they said we are going home, you can stay here if you can’t walk, I stood up and went. And walked I think some five hundred kilometers, up and down in the mountains.
So um, so you were in Bor for some four months? Yes. Well we left Bor on the 29th of September 1944. And what happened after that?
We were taken by two stages – they said we are going home – to Hungary.
The first stage was 4000 people. And of course we were very sad that we were left until the second stage.
How many people were there altogether?
6000.
We were very sad that we were left and only later we found out that they killed all the 4000. I think about 50 people came home.
How did they do it? They just shot them. Who did?
German SS. On the way.
I don’t remember the place, I knew the place where it happened. This famous poet Radnoti Miklos was among them.
Yes?
Then they just lined them up and shot them.
Shot 4000 people? Just like that.
Yeah, yeah.
And no other reason just because they were Jews.
Oh yes, yes. Actually I know one who escaped. He was standing there already, and he started to sing and dance and when they were surprised he ran away in the darkness. And somehow succeeded. I met him in Budapest. Bandi Andre was quite a name. He was writing plays.
Plays?
Plays for theatres. He was writing plays and articles in newspapers. He was a very nice man. He was the only one I know of who. .
How did you find out that these people were shot?
Later on, from the partisans. Later on with this second stage, we left later, and – on the 29th of September and on the way as we went in big fog, among the mountains suddenly we saw a partisan standing there, on the road.
What nationality?
Serbian. Tito partisans. And then we saw another one, and a third one and we hardly dared to look at them. We had 200 Hungarian guard in the front, 200 at the back behind us going with machine guns and all that and plus a German Tiger tank in the front. Didn’t know what goes on. And then we found out – they captured us. One partisan jumped out on the road in front of the commandant, grabbed him – “Surrender!” And he surrendered. Didn’t dare to fight with them. We were surrounded by the partisans, as we found it out. So they found out what happened to the first 4000, and that’s why they freed us.
They couldn’t help them before they were shot?
Well they didn’t. That was…. They didn’t expect it perhaps. I don’t know what happened. But they found out what happened, so they stopped us.
Then you were walking?
Then we were… They took us into the mountains.
What mountains were they?
The Serbian mountains, who knows what is the name – one after the other, you know. And then they told us the story.
Who was that? The partisans?
Tito partisans.
At that time you weren’t under the Germans or. .
No, no. They captured all this 400, and as I heard they hanged them all. I’m not sure about that but that’s what they said. And they told us what happened and we at once told them we want to be partisans too. Good, then come to the headquarters. And then we went for five days, wait a minute, eight days, eight days and that was about 500 kilometres. Now and then the Germans were bombing us with aeroplanes, they were after us. And they took us back to Bor, which was already occupied by the Russian army. And there the partisans : “Now, come on, put the ammunition on the trucks!” And we couldn’t move the ammunition, which one of them threw up on the truck. Four of us couldn’t move it.
The partisan’s ammunition?
Yes. I don’t know, and then they said Go to hell! And so we went, and we lived begging and stealing food.
So you left Bor again a second time?
Yes, and on our own.
Yes?
And begging and stealing food we went to Rumania.
How many kilometers were they?
Oh, I don’t know how many - it wasn’t far…On some of the way we went on Russian trucks, you know. . They gave us some lifts, and we arrived to Turnu Severin.
Where is that?
In Rumania. We just crossed the Danube, and there was Turnu Severin.
[How do you spell it?] I’ll write it down.
[Spell it for the interview] Oh! Just a minute. T-u-r-n-u S-e-v-e-r-i-n. It’s a beautiful town on the Danube. And we got a wonderful reception from the Jews there.
From the Rumanian Jews? From the Rumanian Jews. Yes?
They gave us everything it was possible to imagine.
What date was that?
Well, it was end of October. I remember we were in Negotin, a Serbian town on our way to the border, How do you spell that?
N-e-g-o-t-i-n. And that’s where we heard the radio and it said the date - the 20th of October. Well, from there, well, perhaps one or two days to get to Rumania.
Yes.
So I would say… So that part of the countries…Rumania, Yugoslavia?
It was all under the Russians It was occupied by the Russians.
Yes. Yes. So we were free. Went to Rumania, and er, really wonderful reception. We never stopped.
[. .] Well we never stopped eating. They dressed up us and we were taken to families.
They weren’t. .
Timisuara They [the Jews] weren’t bothered by the Germans as much as the Hungarian Jews were?
No, for one good reason, that, as I heard it, and I can believe it, seeing what goes on there, they bribed the king, and the government. So they were left alone. So the Jews were OK there. Except in the part where the Hungarians went in. They killed the Jews – the Hungarians. But the Rumanians were bribed properly, and they left the Jews alone. I suppose they had unpleasantness and this and that, but - nothing serious as far as I know.
Actually, anti-Semitism wasn’t that serious in Rumania?
Probably not. Probably not. There was. . after all there was the Iron Guard which was the Nazi Party there, but it seemed that they couldn’t achieve what they wanted . . the Iron Guard.
Now I have to change the tape. Just one moment please.
This is the second side of the first tape. Interviewing Mr. John Weiszmann from Maroubra. Yes Mr. Weiszmann?
From Turnu Severin we went to Timisuara, and that’s where we were given out to Jewish families, and we got everything we could want. We were dressed up with new clothes and food, and even pocket money every week, which I myself went to the opera, bought up all the tickets for the week, and spent the rest in a patisserie, on cakes.
Did they have so much to eat there?
It was fantastic. They were so rich in food. In the most peaceful Hungary I never saw that kind of food, than in Rumania after the war. It was first class. Of course we were starved out, so everything was good for us, but I think whatever way I look at it it was first class food.
Yes but it was… And as much as you wanted. And cheap, even for us.
How long did you stay there?
Well, we stayed there really until the middle of February, when Budapest was freed.
From September?
No, from end of October.
October.
Til February ’45.
Yes, and …
Except . .
It was all 2000 people there?
No, they went to different…some of them went to Timisuara, some to Arad, and some very soon went to Seged, which is a . . south – town in the south of Hungary – that was liberated soon. But many of us waited until we can go home to Budapest.
Yes, So, anyway not 6000, only 2000. And even that’s not all, because about 300 was left in Bor who were really sick. And er. .
Where?
In Bor. In a hospital. They called it hospital – it was a big barn. And actually, as we heard it later, after we left the Germans set it on fire. But everybody escaped. The partisans broke in from the back of the hospital, and got them all out.
I thought that they were already liberated from the Germans?
No, when we left Bor for the first time. Not when the partisans took us back. That’s when it happened. That’s when the Germans tried to burn them. But they didn’t succeed.
How come ? The Germans were. . ? When you first left… Let’s make this clear : when you first left Bor . .
Yes.
It was. . Did you say it was liberated already?
No, not yet.
No it wasn’t?
No, we went under the German and Hungarian commandant.
Yes. And then you met these partisans?
Yes. And then we went around for eight days and then we got back to Bor, and the Russians were already there.
And in between this, the first and second time,
Yes.
you were in Bor, these people were burnt?
They were not burned. They only tried to burn them but as I say the partisans rescued them all. Partisans rescued them all.
I see.
Well that’s what we heard.
That was the time when the Germans tried. . tried to harm them? Yes In these eight days?
Yes.
Anyway let’s go back to Timisuara.
We were in Timisuara and then after a while, probably because we were young and restless, we went to Bucharest.
How far is that?
Oh, about a thousand kilometers.
How did you go?
On train.
On train?
The trains were running? Everything was so. . ?
Oh yes, yes, everything, trams. . everything. There was nothing damaged there really. Well, not obviously at least. We didn’t see any real damage.
Yes?
We went to Bucharest, and we spent there I think only three days. Slept in empty offices. One night we slept in a Zionist headquarters. And another night in the Scantea Publishers.
What was that?
That was the publisher of the communist newspaper. And they threw a bomb in it too that night. We didn’t… We only found out in the morning – we slept.
You weren’t hurt at all?
No. No I don’t think anybody was hurt. It was a big building and I don’t know where it happened, but. .
We just slept through it. And the next day, well you couldn’t get on the train back from Bucharest, because even the roof of the train was full, so we bought a passenger wagon, no a cattle wagon. From a porter. That’s how it goes in Rumania.
You actually bought it for money?
Yes. For a thousand lei. Something which is very little money. But he connected it to the train. He connected it to the train, and three of us travelled in luxury there, ‘til Brashow, when the Russians kicked off everybody from the train.
Where is Brassow?
Brassow is in Transylvania. [South of?] It’s a beautiful old. . Town from the Middle ages, and it looks like it, in beautiful condition. Probably the most beautiful town I ever saw.
And it wasn’t hurt by the Germans?
No, it wasn’t hurt by anybody. And we stopped there.
How do you spell it?
B-r-a-s-s-o-w. And we arrived there. We were kicked off the train there on a Friday evening, so where to go? We went to the synagogue. And the Jews took us in.
A lot of Jews were there? Living there?
I wouldn’t say a lot of, but quite a number. It’s not such a big town really. But there were some Jews and they took us home, and then they arranged for us to go to . . some. . on top of a truck. On top of a truck back to Timisuara, and well of course it was in December, terribly cold.
Why did they want you to go back to Timisuara?
Well we wanted to go back. We wanted to go home, after all, as soon as possible. We had nothing to do in Brassow. And well we got back after all. After some adventures. They had to scrape us off the truck because we had frozen to the truck. But…
Open truck?
Yes open truck of course. So we got back to Timisuara and we stayed there until the middle of February.
How many of you in this group?
Well, well, we were boys together, we were in school together. In the camp together. We started about 12 of us, but er, some of them didn’t come back.
From where?
Well, they went with the first stage.
With the first 4000?
Yes. With the first 4000. So, oh, I don’t know now. Suddenly I … Oh, five or six of us.
Yes.
That was a big help though. Probably that’s why we stayed alive. We were together and helped each other in everything. And middle of February went back to Budapest.
From Timisuara?
From Timisuara.
How did you go back to Budapest? Walked, or?
By train, by Russian truck, and by walk.
How far is [??] ?
I can only guess – 3 - 400 kilometres.
How long did it take you to go back? To get back then?
That’s something I don’t really remember, but I don’t remember sleeping anywhere on the road, so perhaps we did it in one day, but I’m not sure.
Yes. During these times, travelling times who fed you? How did you got fed?
Well in Timisuara we lived with the Jewish families, so we were fed there, and we had some pocket money. So actually when we left Timisuara we filled up our rucksacks with a lot of. . with as much food as we could carry, so it was no real problem.
And then you arrived home?
Arrived home. I found nobody at home except … What was the date?
Oh, I would say – around the 25th of February perhaps. But I’m not sure about that.
1945?
1945.
The war wasn’t over yet.
No, no, but Budapest was already freed.
Uh uh.
Went home. .
Both Buda and Pest?
Was free, yes.
Or only Pest?
No, both of them.
Went home. The only one I found there was our old dog. And some people lived there, Christians.
In the same place?
In our house. Well I kicked them out. So I told them: tomorrow you have to move out.
And they did?
They did. They were scared of me.
And your parents – what happened? What?
I didn’t know much about it. Well after all…Then I found out things about Auschwitz, and . . I didn’t know where they were taken. As it happened they were taken to Auschwitz.
Both of them?
Yes. And, well, nobody ever saw my father again. My mother came back.
When did she come back?
Um, in. . I think in August 1945. She was in Auschwitz, Bergen Belsen , and they worked in Magdeburg. Ammunition factory. And then they were liberated there.
And from there she came straight home?
Yes. They mainly walked home.
Yes. What condition was she in when she came home?
Well she was very thin, but otherwise she was alright. She was 45 then. So, young, then. I met her on the station. Railway station.
Did you know that she was going to arrive?
I was walking on the street when someone came and told :“Your mother is on the station”. So I run there at once.
And found her there. That was in Ujpest? Yes.
That is a… sort of a… Well, a district of Budapest.
District of Budapest.
Today it’s called the Fourth District.
And then what happened?
Well then we lived in our own house, and well, I was at the University then.
What did you study?
Medical.
Medical ?
Medical university. I actually did two and a half years in one and a half year.
Which one [??] Yes. And then I had to stop because, well we started our business, because we had to earn our living too. And opened the old business, and well, my mother couldn’t do it on her own.
Actually what happened between the time that your mother came home and you started the business. ? How long time did it go?
Oh well, I think it must have been 1946, end of ’46 when we started the business.
From ’45? . . when did she come home?
She came home end of ’45 I mean in August.
August. And what did you live on?
Probably nothing, thinking of it. But – number one we had a goat. So I had milk. And then, …
In Ujpest?
Yes, yes. We got that goat when the war started and it was difficult to get milk, we got a goat. And it was still there. And then, and actually I went to the people I knew they had our money and other things hidden, What, your parents gave some money…?
Yes, yes. Of course then they denied I but I told them that’s alright, I believe every word of them, but I have a good friend in the KGB. I’ll ask them to go and look around. So at once they had our money. Of course I never had a friend at the KGB. So I got a little money here, and a little money there, but they stole an awful lot, of course.
Could you buy food? Was it available?
Well, not at the beginning, but at the beginning I had food because I brought a lot with me. And then, I remember the great day when I heard that you can get bean soup at a place. At the beginning I had bean soup every day. And so, I managed it.
And so you went to university straight after you came home? Yes. After two-three weeks we decided with a friend of mine. . Universities were open? By then?
Yes, yes. Of course there was no transport, so we walked. From Ujpest we walked into the university every day, which was about ten kilometers. And walked home.
Well, there wasn’t that much teaching. I know the first day I went in they took me to the anatomy institute. “Go and cut”. There was a corpse. I didn’t know where to start – what to cut. But that’s how it started. And well, sooner or later it got more in order, but I think the main reason for that was they had too many corpses – they didn’t know what to do with them.
What about the professors, the teachers?
Oh, there were some around, there were some around. And actually there were some first class professors there. And well, so I did that. It took one and a half years, and then I had to stop it and go to the business, which was of course nationalized in 1948.
So your business was… you started the business in ’46?
’46? Probably. Probably the beginning of ’46. That was the same business what you had? Yes.
Your father had?
Yes, yes.
Did you had materials to start with?
Well, there was some left. What they didn’t manage to steal yet. And well we had a good name so we got material from the factory in. .
So there were factories around already working and. . ? producing things. . ?
Well, working slowly. . you know, if you had good connections, you could get something here and there. And well, we knew everybody then. . in the trade, you know.
Yes, and . . Where could you sell your work?
To the joiners. Joiners. Well, there were plenty in Ujpest – at least one joiner in every house. It was the centre of joinery in Hungary.
Was it?
Yes, yes.
And it was a lot of buildings to repair?
Yes. That too, but mainly furniture. Furniture, you know.
And of course the Nationalisation came in ’48, but we found it out one day earlier, . .
What date was it?
Oh, I don’t remember the date, no. No I don’t remember the date. But one day earlier we found it out so we gave our licence back. Which was a good thing because. .
To whom?
I don’t know – to the Council, government or whatever. Which meant, they didn’t take it away. So we were left with the material, which we were able to sell slowly in the black market.
But that’s interesting. They didn’t come after you to check? No, no, because officially our business didn’t exist. On that day. Yes.
So we were left the business itself, which was a very big area. And actually we rented it out with the . . So it was all left. When my mother came out she sold it.
Before she came?
Yes.
So, what happened after ’48?
Well, after that I tried a lot of things, and then I got a job at the – I don’t know how to say it in English – Bizomanyi Aruhaz – “Commission store” you could say, perhaps. .
Commission store, yes.
I became a valuer.
What did you value?
Well, I valued just about everything – watches, photography equipment, instruments. .
What do you mean valuer? What did you have to do. . ?
Well, people brought in second hand stuff.
Yes?
And we took it in and sold it again. And I was the one who valued it.
Yes. . how much it …cost… And well, I did that until ’56, when I left.
From ’48?
No, I started it in ’50 – 1950.
There is a hiatus – when, I don’t know - I did little things. . I.. I can’t remember.
So you can’t remember what you did between ’48 and ’50?
Not really. Not really. I.. there was a time I studied upholstery, I know – worked in an upholstery shop. There was a time I went to learn to drive, which was quite a big business then, you know. It took some six weeks or what.
What did you live on?
Well, we had enough then, to live on, really. So we were not poor.
Yes. And in 1950. . ?
’50 I started as a valuer, until I left Hungary. In fact I got some decorations there. The ‘best worker of the trade’. And things like that.
That was under the Russians?
Oh, yes, under. . in Communism. Yes, and it was a good job really.
How did you leave Hungary?
Well, secretly.
Together with your mother?
No, no. On my own, on my own. I was caught on the border the first time I went, but there were so many they just sent us home. So the next evening I walked through again. And I succeeded.
And somebody would show you. . ?
No, on my own. In fact I think it was the real chutzpah, because I walked to the guard, who stood there with a machine gun, and walked to him, and I said “Good evening,” and walked through. He was just staring at me. And I walked through. I don’t know if it was luck or whatever, but, I got through.
And where was that? Where did you go through? From where to where?
Oh, well, . . er. . I know I went to Gyor, and from there to the border…I don’t know the exact spot.
And what was the country you walked in to?
Austria.
Austria.
I went to Vienna. I was there for a while.
What happened to you mother in Hungary while you were away. . ?
Oh, she was alright.
Yes. She was alright. We kept correspondence and after five years she came out.
Officially?
Yes.
To Australia?
To Australia, yes.
So, in Vienna. . You went to Vienna.
Went to Vienna, and I was helped by the JOINT. And applied for the Australian landing permit.
Why Australian?
Because it was far enough from Europe. That was the main reason. And anyway I had a cousin here, and at least I thought I know somebody there.
Yes.
He is still here. So when I got the visa and as soon as it was possible I left Vienna. I went to Salzburg. I was in a camp there. And from Salzburg I came out.
You were never married in Hungary, were you?
No. No. I only got married when I was 37.
Oh?
Better late than never. That’s right.
So you came out to Australia ?
Yes.
And to your cousin?
Well, I came to his place and as soon as I got a job I left him and went on my own.
What job did you do?
Well my first job was in a clockmaker factory. I told them I was the second best clockmaker in Hungary.
I was prepared if they ask who was the first one I would say that he died. As a matter of fact I never saw clock making from close. But that didn’t matter – I did what the next one did and that was OK.
Except that they went broke. Then I left them.
Who went broke?
The company.
Yes. Because of you, or. . ?
Not because of me, I think because of the foreman and the manager. The manager was lying on the desk all day stone drunk and the foreman took at least a dozen clocks home every night. So, not surprising they went broke. And then I got a job at the ICI factory. I was there for a few months, and then I got a job as a photographer. And I did that for five years, and then I started my own photo studio, which I did ‘til ’77.
Anyway, so you got married here in Australia?
Yes. Yes.
To an Australian lady?
Yes.
Who became a Jewess?
Yes.
And you have children?
Three children.
Three children. All Jewish of course?
All Jewish. My little daughter just came back from Israel. The. . My son is in Israel for a year in a kibbutz. And my big daughter is still, well, working on her art.
Yes. She is an artist.
She is an artist and . . She would like to go too, but she wants to finish things here at first.
Tell me, what do you think that you became a …? What was the reason that you became a survivor after you were a victim?
Well, you can say number one luck. Number two, that we were together – young boys- we were already friends – we helped each other, and I think the way of looking at things. It never once occurred to me that I won’t go home. There was a friend of us, who was very pessimistic and he always said: We will never go home, we will never go home - and he didn’t.
But I think our mentality really was that there’s no way that we would stay here.
And what made you do this interview?
Well, I read about this invitation to it and I agree with the idea that these things should be kept – should be known, at least on paper, somewhere. Nobody ever heard of Bor, as far as I can see, so it is time that there should be some mark of it left. Actually I have a few friends who were in Bor. Here, in Australia.
Anyway, we’ve nearly finished our tape, and I just want to thank you very much for this interview.
Thank you for listening to it. And it was very enlightening. Well. .
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
