Interview with George Kadar
April 24, 2000 Beginning Tape One, Side A
Question: This is an interview with George Kadar, conducted by Katie Davis on April 24th, in the year 2000, at the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington, D.C. This is tape number one, side A. Can we begin with what your name was at birth?
Answer: At birth? Krausz.
Q: Your full name.
A: George. This is Hungarian, György, George, Georg, Georges -- is the same.
Q: And how do you spell your last name? The ori --
A: K-a-d-a-r.
Q: The original name.
A: K-K-r-a-u-s-z.
Q: Okay. So, when were you born?
A: The ninth of Ju -- of June, 1929.
Q: And can you tell us where you were born?
A: I was born in Székesfehérvár. Shall I spell it?
Q: Yes.
A: Oh. S-z-e-k-e-r-v-a-r. Well, this is a -- a small place, small town, between Budapest, which is the capital of Hungary, and Lake Balaton, which is the -- the lake.
Q: Mm-hm. Tell us a little bit of more about the town. What was it like?
A: About what?
Q: About the city you were born in.
A: Well, the city, the city’s quite beautiful, and I think made in the 1800, and the city has been totally destroyed during the war, and rebuilt in the old style now, so the city still exists. It is bigger, more traffic, more life than so many years ago.
Q: Can you tell us the name of your father, and then of your mother?
A: Yes. Lászlo, L-á-s-z-l-o. And my mother is Ilona, I-l-o-n-a.
Q: And what was -- what was your mother’s maiden name?
A: Huszár, H-u-s-z-á-r.
Q: And how about your grandparents, on both sides?
A: Well, I never met my grandfather, because he died two years before I -- bef-before my birth, and -- and the mother of my mother, called Vilma, V-i-l-m -- m-a Meisel, maiden name, M-e-i-s-e-l. The other grandfather, Krauth Theojef -- Krausz Jószef -- Jószef -- J-Joseph, and his wife Emma, E-m-m-a Kohn, K-o-h-n.
Q: And what did you know about your father’s father? Where was he from, what did he do?
A: Well, my father’s father sold -- so he was a s-s-salesman, I think [indecipherable] salesman, coal and other mat -- other material to heat. And my grand -- my grandmother, who was angel, she -- she wanted to -- to somehow to -- together the family, and she was a very good point -- meeti -- meeting point, not only because she was so nice, but because her cooking was so fantastic. And my grandfather was not very kind, so -- but, he was terribly religious. He went every day to the synagogue, and regularly, and Yom Kippur afternoon, the mincha, he was the maftir. You understand what I am ta-talking about? You know?
Q: Explain.
A: Pardon?
Q: Explain.
A: Well, th -- you know that S-Saturday in the Jewish holy -- Jewish -- th-the mo --
Q: In the Jewish week?
A: No, no, no, no, no, not the Jewish week, no, no, no. The -- The -- The Jewish feast of a -- and I think this is one of the best sides of the Jewish religion. The Torah will be read, and according to the importance of the day, seven plus one, or three plus one, are called to the Torah. The last, or the plus one is the maftir, whose role is -- whose -- whose role is – beaucoup - much more important than the -- than the rest. And, so usually he was the maftir, and he was ex-extremely proud of it. It’s a pity that he lived private life, he was completely different. William Blake says somewhere, “Humble to God, haughty to man.” And well, so was he.
Q: This is your maternal grandfather?
A: No, th-the paternal --
Q: Paternal?
