United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Irena Veisaite
September 7, 2004
RG-50.030*0505 PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a taped interview with Irena Veisaite, conducted on September 7, 2004 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
IRENA VEISAITE
September 7, 2004
Beginning Tape One
Question: Good morning.
Answer: Good morning.
Q: I would like to start with asking you to tell your name, place and date of birth, please.
A: I am Irena Veisaite. I was born in Kaunas a long time ago, in 1928, on the ninth of January.
Q: So, when the war began, you were --
A: 13 years old.
Q: 13 years old.
A: Yeah.
Q: Can you please tell me something about this 13 years old girl before the war, please.
A: Well, I was very lucky to be born in a wonderful family, in a wealthy family. I had really a wonderful childhood, except maybe that my parents get divorced in ’38, which was, of course, a very big shock to me. My father left Lithuania, remarried later on, and I stayed with my mother in Kaunas. I -- I was probably a quite good pupil. My father sent me to a Yiddish school Shalom Aleichem gymnasium, which was famous. They had very good teachers, and it was a left wing school, I would say, which was shaped by Yiddishes -- by the Yiddishists and not by sci -- Zionists. And the people --
Q: [indecipherable]
A: Sorry?
Q: [indecipherable]
A: Mis -- yeah, but my -- my parents were already out of the shtetl, they were European educated people. My mother finished [indecipherable] schule in Berlin. My father got his education in Hamburg, and th -- and so they were not religious, but were very tolerant. My grandparents -- I had -- had only my grandparent -- parents from my mother’s side, so they were quite m -- they came out of Bapte my father was a milkman, like Tevya from Shalom Aleichem. Was really a wonderful, wonderful man. I think he influenced the whole family a lot, with his very open-minded and -- views and with his goodness.
Q: Excuse me, I must ask you for --
A: Mm-hm.
Q: Can you take off this -- because it makes sounds on the tape will you, and -- thank you. Sorry for interrupting you.
A: Yeah, okay. And -- and I was educated respecting them very much and very much respecting their belief, and I would go every Friday for kiddush, to -- to meet Saturday and I was attending there all day, of course holidays and Rosh Hashanah and -- and especially Easter, where I played a big role under the table, looking for [indecipherable]
Q: You say their holidays.
A: Not -- not holidays, but how is it in English, [indecipherable]. It is like -- no --
Q: Yes, I understand.
A: Yeah.
Q: But you say their.
A: I was with my par -- when I -- with my grandparents always there.
Q: Their holidays, their --
A: Their Jewish holidays.
Q: Their Jewish holidays. Back then you felt it’s theirs and not yours? A: Because in our house we didn’t celebrate it, we especially. So I felt it more tha -- as the -- a-as the tradition of my grandparents, which was very nice and respected. But I had also in my childhood a Christmas tree.
Q: Mm-hm.
A: Because ma -- not because it was for relig -- religious purposes, that my parents was -- were saying that you can take from other people the best they have, and they wouldn’t like me to be envious of other children who have this tree and get their different presents. So I had also a Christmas tree and our home was very international. We had very many guests, Lithuanians and Russians and -- from all over the world, friends who would come and visit us. So my parents spoke already -- except English probably, all European languages, French, German, Polish, Russian. So -- no, my -- my parents told me that you have always to speak the language that everybody understands, if you can. So I was multilingual from childhood. I was speaking from my -- my native languages were two, Lithuanian, and Russian, I spoke from childhood. And then when I was five years old I had something with my lungs and I was sent to S-Switzerland, to Arosa in a sanitorium, where I stayed for almost a year, and then I forgot all languages. I came back not speaking Lithuanian and not speaking Russian, but speaking only German. And I remember that I went with my parents to Moscow, my father had his family there and m-my uncle made me a present, such a sewing machine, a children’s sewing machine. And it is in Russian shvaina mashina. So I was told that -- that -- then the joke was that I answered the [speaks Russian here], I don’t want a big mach-machine, yeah. So this only proves that I really didn’t speak any more Russian, but of course the languages came back very fast. And when I was sent to the Shalom Aleichem gymnasium, to the yeshida school, I didn’t speak Yiddish, but I learned it quite fast. And I -- but the -- the beginning was not so good because I didn’t speak so well Yiddish, so my classmates would call me the intelligentka. So --
Q: This is also a question I wanted to ask you about.
A: Mm-hm.
Q: On one hand you described a very cosmopolitan house.
A: Yeah.
Q: And on the other hand you are sent to a Yiddish --
A: Yeah.
Q: -- school.
A: Yeah.
Q: Didn’t you feel any contradiction?
A: No, I didn't feel because I mentioned already that it was a left wing school, really a very good school. I remember my -- my -- my teachers, most of the teachers with great respect. And my -- I must say that, for instance, my Lithuanian, I am really literate in Lithuanian. I write in Lithuanian well, and I learned -- I spoke from childhood, but I learned really the language and the writing in this Jewish school. Bu -- and my -- my teacher was [indecipherable]. She perished in the Holocaust, and she came from a Lithuanian province and she was -- she finished the university, Lithuanian language and literature, and she was really a wonderful teacher.
Q: Now --
A: So this -- a-and they saved my life also, you know, beca --
Q: You will tell about this later, but --
A: Yeah.
Q: -- you said -- you use an expression that I would like --
A: Mm-hm.
Q: -- if you allow me, to check with you. You said about your teacher that she perished in the Holocaust. You -- you mean she was murdered in the Holocaust?
A: Murdered, yeah, murdered. Sorry, my English is maybe not so [indecipherable]
Q: No, no, no, because -- because -- it’s not your English, because many people don’t use the term murder, and they, like --
A: No, she was killed. She was killed in the Holocaust, yeah.
Q: She was wo -- yes.
A: And but she was -- in the school she was an exception, because she was a Zionist. But because she was a very good teacher, she was kept in the school. And my father had also illusions, left winged illusions. He was a rich man in Kaunas and he had his own house, he has his own business. But he was -- he was dreaming about social justice, and as you know, in the 30’s, many European, not only Lithuanian intellectuals, had this illusion that the Soviet Union is maybe the solution. And maybe they are giving equal rights to everybody. So he insisted that a -- I go to this school. All my cousins went to Lithuanian school.
Q: So your father was a leftist bourgeois?
A: He was a salon communist, I would say. Not a communist, but a left wing salon. He was helping people who were in trouble. He was paying, I think, money for Mopar -- for the -- this was an organization who has collected money for the political prisoners in -- in those times. And in the main time he was -- he was quite a rich man, and he never came to the -- to live in the Soviet Union. So -- and th --
Q: What -- what -- what were he doing --
A: -- and his -- his -- his family -- you know, my father was sent to be educated in Hamburg, because my grandfather, who was a merchant of the second gildia -- I know that’s a quite high level, he was quite [indecipherable] man. He was -- he had his business in Garganas, it’s was -- it’s not far, now it’s Byelorussia. And all his chil -- sons became revolutionaries, so he got sick of it, fed up with it and he decided, the youngest son, to send to -- to study in Germany, that he shouldn’t become a revolutionary. But my -- they were really -- you -- you should very much distinguish the revolutionaries of those times with the Stalin times, because they were -- they really thought it was an utopias, you know, and an utopia, that’s socialism, and communism will bring social justice, equality and so on. And it ended that one brother of my father was arrested in ’37 and killed by Stalin. A-And -- because he was a too honest man, he was a quite known person. He was the director of [speaks Lithuanian here] this is fiction literature, it’s a big, big publishing house. And he was also then later on the director of the medicine -- is that me-medical publishing house. Well, he was accused so, and he was killed. He was arrested in ’37. And my other uncle who was a professor, he never joined the party again after the Bolsheviks came to power because he saw what happened in the Crimea. He spend the time of the civil war in Crimea and he saw what the -- really the Bolsheviks are like, and he never joined the party. He had his own story, which I don’t know if we have time to tell you now, but very interesting, that he never told me, really, the truth he knew.
Q: About the Bolsheviks?
A: When I came -- yeah, when I came, because everybody was afraid then. And only when he was already quite -- qui -- after -- after Khrushchev’s letter, this -- in -- on the -- in ’56, when Stalin was really -- it was opened up what he did, he told me that he knew it all, because he also knew -- he was a friend of Krupska, Lenin’s wife, who was also persecuted by Stalin and the whole -- all -- all -- this whole regime on -- and the -- the -- what -- what happened in ’37, he had no illusions. But of course he -- but then he told me really true story.
Q: After. Many years later.
A: Yeah, yeah.
Q: So your father was sent to Germany --
A: Mm-hm.
Q: -- to study, and he came back to Lithuania.
A: And then th-the -- the first World War started, because he was born in 1900. So when the first World War started, and you know that Lithuania was under the Tsarist regime, so he was a rush -- a r -- a citizen of Russia. So he went back with lot -- with lot of adventures, and he was even arrested by the Bolsheviks as a German spy. And just by miracle he -- his life was saved and he came back to Kaunas and his father was already in Kaunas. He was the owner of [speaks Lithuanian here], it was a lottery. And because he was the only one not in Russian, not in the Soviet Union, so he inherited his business, and it was the stu -- h-he was the owner of [speaks Lithuanian here]. This is the -- the main agency of the government lottery.
Q: Would you like to make a break and to have some water for your throat?
A: Maybe it would b-be good because I -- my --
Q: Okay. Let’s stop for a moment.
A: Mm-hm.
Q: [indecipherable] can you please bring a glass of water? [interruption] Thank you. Okay, so your father came back to Kaunas.
A: Mm-hm.
Q: At the age of?
A: Then he was 20 something, or maybe a little bit less, I can’t tell you exactly --
Q: When di --
A: -- but he is born in 1900.
Q: And when did he start his business? He became a wealthy man l-later on.
A: In ’26, I think, my grandfather -- my grandfather was wealthy, and --
Q: Mm-hm. Ou-out of --
A: -- and he -- an-and my father inherited his business, the lottery business.
Q: The lottery business.
A: And th-then he never [indecipherable]
Q: I see, I see.
A: Mm-hm.
Q: Okay, so you were studying in a Yiddish school --
A: Yeah.
Q: -- with leftist tendency --
A: Yeah.
Q: -- in a cosmopolitan family.
A: Yeah.
Q: You didn’t f -- did you feel a Jew, or did you feel a citizen of the world?
A: No, I felt that I am -- I am a Lithuanian Jew. This I felt, of course. I -- this -- I was -- I was, you know, educated in our school, very patriotic, because we were studying history. I don’t know if you heard, there was such a -- a textbook shap -written by a Lithuanian historian, Shapulka, who really mythologized the Lithuanian history. And his book had the -- probably the task to unite a nation, because I don’t know if you know Lithuanian history, but Lithuania was -- the history is quite painful, because you know that the Polish influence, the Russian influence, and -- and the Lithuanian speaker were mainly peasants. So it was very important to unite a nation and to give them a mythology that -- to be proud. And then it came to idealize the past, our -- our great --
Q: You identified with this?
A: Yeah, I identified with that --
Q: You did, you did.
A: -- I was singing [indecipherable] Vilnius [indecipherable] was very anti-Polish. In -- in -- in -- not against the individual, but that Vilnius was occupied and we were very strong, yeah. And you know, I remember even such a joke, which shows you also where we had a -- it was obligatory to have a exa-examination religion.
Q: Mm-hm.
A: And a little --
Q: A religion in the Yiddish school.
A: In -- in the Yiddish school, Jewish religion.
Q: Jewish religion.
A: And I had also to -- to pass this exam. And I was really always the first pupil, which is not very good for developing a good character, but it happened that I was. So -- and you know, and the -- th -- the person, the teacher who was asking questions was a Lithuanian inspector. And he asked me --
Q: A Jew?
A: Wha -- no, not a Jew --
Q: So how --
A: -- a Lithuanian inspector.
Q: -- how could he --
A: He came to -- to find out what is -- how -- how religion is teaching in our school -- is -- is taught in our school.
Q: I -- he did make the examination, but only checked --
A: No -- yeah, he came -- additional questions.
Q: Okay.
A: So he asked me -- I think so, maybe you know, you can sometimes remember, but I remember that this Lithuanian inspector asked me, what is Yom Kippur? So I said, Yom Kippur is a very famous artist. It was -- y-you probably know Jan Kiepura. He was a -- playing -- he was of Polish, I think, origin and he was playing, if I am not mistaken, with Martha Eggerth, and -- and she was also very famous actress, and --
Q: So how did he react in respect to --
A: He -- I -- everybody was laughing.
Q: He was laughing as well?
A: And he was laughing as well.
Q: Yeah. So an --
A: No, and I -- I still -- I very much liked all the, you know, all the -- the -- Easter especially, and I was always asking the que -- the -- the kashas [speaks foreign language here] and -- and so on, so I -- I didn’t reject it, and --
Q: Uh-huh.
A: -- no way. And we were very much, you know, indoctrinated against the Sinai schools, the Hebrew schools. So, in -- in the end, in the Soviet times the Hebrew schools were closed, and some of the -- of the pupils from the Hebrew schools came to our school, but -- was united, the school.
Q: Mm-hm.
A: And oh we had quite big fights with the Zionists there, I remember.
Q: And you a-as a 13 or 12 years old girl --
A: Yeah.
Q: -- you had your opinions.
A: I had my opinion, yeah. I had my opinion and -- and I had a very big conflict with a -- with a boy who was the best pupil, the first pupil in his school, in the Hebrew school, Schwabe. And I was the first in AMI school. And when we came together in the first trem -- seme -- semester finished, so he -- I was the first and he was the second. So he started the fight against me. So it was a whole story, but it -- it’s fine [indecipherable] Bloomberg, a very nice boy. He survived.
Q: And sometime in the period before the war started, during your youth in Kaunas, do you feel any antisi -- anti-Semitism? Did you omit and phenomena of anti-Semitism?
Q: To be honest, I didn’t feel, no. I didn’t feel. I-I had -- my school friends were Jewish, but I had also -- we had a lot around. I hadn’t -- I -- probably I didn't have very close friends of my age of Lithuanian ethnic origin. But I really didn’t -- didn’t feel -- but what I really felt is a terrible fear because of war, because the adults were speaking all the time about war, about Hitler, about what is happening. And I had even such a terrible dream, you know, I don’t remember so many dreams, but this is one of the dreams I remember very well. I was a little girl and somehow I found myself in a camp where Hitler was. And I was taken to his -- to his tent and he was ca -- somehow very kind, he -- he told me that I should sit on his knees and say him Poppy. This is father. And I couldn’t say it. And this was terrible for me and then I woke up.
Q: You --
