United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Sibylle Sarah Niemoeller
December 1, 2004
RG-50.030*0490 PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a videotaped interview with Sibylle Sarah Niemoeller, conducted on December 1, 2004 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
SIBYLLE SARAH NIEMOELLER
December 1, 2004
Beginning Tape One
Question: Good morning, Sibylle.
Answer: Good morning.
Q: It’s so nice to see you. What was your name when you were born?
A: My name was Sybilla Augusta Sophia von Sell. Augusta after my mother, and Sophia after my aunt, it’s -- it’s a family name, and Sybilla after the princess of Coburg and Gotha who la -- later became queen -- crown princess of Sweden, and is Gustav’s mother -- was Gustav’s mother.
Q: And your name now?
A: My name now, I dropped -- I -- I didn’t quite drop Augusta, I still use it as an initial. My name now is Sibylle Sarah Niemoeller. It’s my Jewish name, and I -- I picked it myself.
Q: And you keep von Sell as your --
A: Yes, as a --
Q: -- as a family -- as the family name.
A: Yes, yes.
Q: And it’s Sybilla, it’s not Sibyl --
A: Yes, but you know, it’s Sibylle, really, I be -- in this country, I prefer to be called Sibylle.
Q: Sibylle.
A: Yes.
Q: Okay. And when were you born?
A: On the 10th of April.
Q: And the year?
A: 1923.
Q: 1923, okay. Somehow I thought it was 1924.
A: No.
Q: But no, it’s 1923.
A: No.
Q: And where were you born?
A: I was born Potsdam.
Q: And did you --
A: The cradle of Prussian military.
Q: Yes? And how long did you stay there?
A: Until I was two and a half years old, that’s when my family moved to -- my father had a new position, and we moved to Berlin, but not to Berlin Dahlem yet, but we stayed in -- in another half suburb of Berlin, which was known for being nice, and quiet, and cheap.
Q: Uh-huh. So tell me -- I would like to get a sense of your family. Tell me about your mother first, and then we’ll go to your father, and the --
A: Yes, of course.
Q: -- and what the home life was like.
A: Oh, by the way, since you asked my -- my names, I was not -- the authorities have to come to my parents after my birth to tell them what my name was going to be. They had not counted on a girl. I was to be -- I was to be a boy because my father had lost his three brothers --
Q: Right.
A: -- in the first World War, which was such a tragedy. And here comes a girl, so not everybody was terribly amused. My mother -- I was my mother’s second child, because she had been married before, she wa -- married at age 19, a Baron von Hornstein, who not only had a Jewish grandmother, but was the rightful heir to the name -- I’m sorry, he was the child -- he was the great, great grandchild of Lord Nelson and Lady Hamilton. That’s the one thing I en -- I always envied my sister who -- my stepsister -- half sister, who is 10 years older than I am, always envied her for it.
Q: So your mother married into that family?
A: My mother married into that family, that was a zo -- the -- they are -- that was old nobility around Lake Constance, and very Catholic, so she had to agree that in case my half sister was born as a boy that he had to be brought up Catholic, which is, I think, a very brutal decision to split a family that way. Well but so he was bor -- he was baptized in the Protestant faith, and then my mother lost her husband during the first few weeks of the first World War, and became very ill with tuberculosis, which meant she -- thanks to the help of the friend of the family, the victor -- Queen Victoria’s great grand-nephew, the count of Coburg and Gotha -- not count, I’m sorry, the duke of Coburg and Gotha saw to it that she was put in a -- in a -- a sanitorium, and she survived very well. She died at 93. My mother’s family is by far -- is lo -- a lot older than my father’s family. My father’s family, of which I’ll talk later, they were really newcomers to nobility, meaning they were mor -- they were nobilized in 1657, while my mother’s family goes back to -- to Charlemagne, documented.
Q: Really?
A: Yes. And they were partially -- they we -- they came from the east, how much Slavic influence there was, we can only guess. A lot, I would say.
Q: Why?
A: Well, I -- sometimes, you know, the Vens, that Slavic tribe that ruled Germany between the river Rhine and the -- and the -- or not -- not the Rhine, the Elba, and the Oda, they ruled in Germany, a wild tribe, for three to 400 years. So everybody has Vendish, Solbic, Serbic blood in them. And my mother was born -- my mother’s father was a Prussian general, and he had been one of -- his name was von Brauchitsch, Brokovitce, you know, God knows what it was originally. And my -- my grandfather was a Prussian general, as was my father’s father. And he was one of 23 children.
Q: 23?
A: Yes, his father had married several times, and there were your children, my children, our children. And there are funny legends going around about that family like a -- a Brauchitsch officer stopped the little guy on -- in -- in a military school, asked for his name and then found out they were brothers. How many of them are true, I never -- I call them legends. So they were -- they didn’t have much money of course, and my -- my --
Q: So being nobility didn’t mean that you had money?
A: Oh, absolutely not --
Q: So you had privilege?
A: -- I mean, that’s how the Crusades once started.
Q: Uh-huh, uh-huh.
A: Get the second and third son, get them out of the way, give them something to do. And no -- and the -- the -- my oldest uncle, my mother’s oldest brother, he inherited this fabulous castle, the Rimburg, which is on the border from Germany to Holland, to the Netherlands, and the n -- Holland claimed it after this last war, and my uncle was very happy about it, but then the Germans got it back. And my mother had -- there were six or seven children. Uncle Siegfried was the oldest, and my grandmother was 18 years old, and she had the baby, as was done in those days, at home, but thank goodness with the help of a -- of a doctor. And he wa -- wa -- held the baby and declared him dead, and put him on a chair, and after awhile that dead child began to howl and yell, and he -- he lived. And the -- the doctor told my -- my grandfather that that was to be the first and only child. Oh, the -- she had a Caesarian, which in those days, can you imagine? And after the Caesarian she had right away one more child after the other, seven altogether.
Q: Really?
A: Yeah. And died completely exhausted and spent at age 49.
Q: So this was your mother’s mother?
A: That’s my mother’s mother. I never met her, of course.
Q: Right. Now was your mother educated?
A: No. Girls in those --
Q: Girls were not educated.
A: -- days, girls in those days were pitifully off. Really, she went to a -- she went to a girl’s school, I suppose, in wherever they lived. Oh my -- my grandfather had been the commander of Colmar, Alsatian Colmar, which then was German, which as a consequen -- which had a cra -- had a confer -- consequence. About 20 years after this past war, let’s say in 1965 or so, the French government offered French citizenship to my mother.
Q: Really?
A: Yeah, which was very nice, but my mother said, no, I’m 80 years old, you know, I might as well stay who I am and where I am.
Q: Right.
A: But she felt very much like li -- very Alsatian and spoke French with a strong Alsatian accent, which is funny. And from there he went to another military g-garrison in Silesia and finally to Potsdam and in Potsdam it was time for the girls. After school my mother had -- had finishing school, one year in a finishing school in Geneva.
Q: So this was a finishing school in order to be it -- to come out --
A: Presentable, right.
Q: -- and -- oh, uh-huh.
A: I mean, her knowledge of things, be it mathematics, or -- or history, forget about it. She was -- and that -- that led to her debut before -- before the emperor, and that was mandatory. Otherwise, you -- she would never catch a husband. And so, you know, th -- how they managed, with their meager income, it was at that time meager because my -- my grandfather had to retire at age 55 because during a hunt, a hunter has mistaken his head for a hare, and put a load of what do you -- what do you call the BB gun --
Q: Buckshot? Oh.
A: -- BB in there, which he was not mortally wounded, but to get all the little pieces out of his scalp was impossible, so he could never wear a steel helmet again. A general without a helmet? Unthinkable. So he had to retire and live off a meager pension. They had just barely enough to eat and so did the ba -- the servants, you know, the life without food was thinkable, but not without servants. And then the -- my mother was taken to that wonderful ba -- ball of the year, and was pres -- officially presented to the majesties, and then other balls -- dances, followed, during which she met her first husband. Erich Baron von Hornstein, and --
Q: And is that when she becomes a baroness?
A: No, no, no, she had been a baroness.
Q: Okay, she’s a baroness anyway?
A: I -- only -- only -- only noble -- no -- people of nobility were invited there, others did not exist.
Q: Exist, right.
A: Of course the -- the -- there was the so-called briefadle, which was the -- many of those which the Kaiser bestowed upon a person with great merits. But those were people that were looked down upon, of course.
Q: Yeah, because they were not true nobility.
A: Right.
Q: Yeah.
A: And among my ancestors is not a single bourgeois, not a single one. I mean, as far as we can go back, you know?
Q: Right. It’s all nobility [indecipherable]
A: All nobility because they didn’t meet anybody else.
Q: Yeah. So how did your mother meet your father? Do you know?
A: Oh absolutely, my father and my mother -- of course, he was old nobility too [indecipherable]
Q: Yes.
A: And they --
Q: But not quite as old.
A: Not quite as old, but that was, you know --
Q: Didn’t -- that didn’t matter.
A: That didn’t, no, no, you know. And they met socially in Potsdam. He was a very outstanding young officer. He had been put in military school with all his brothers at age eight, and that was a brutal education for this very sensitive boy. And he knew one thing, never mind what his father wanted, or what his -- his -- the plans that he had made for him, he will not enter the military as a -- choose the military as a career. His aim was become a diplomat and at a very young age, he became the adjutant of the then Reichschancellor von Bethmann-Hollweg. And in that capacity he -- he -- for instance, he took -- he took the declaration of war to the Kaiser personally to be signed. And he had -- he was a very promising young man who had probably become a vi -- finance mis -- minister or something like that. And then the war ended.
