United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Ernest Koenig
June 12, 1997
RG-50.549.02*0003
PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of an audio taped interview with Ernest Koenig, conducted on June 12, 1997 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview took place in Alexandria, Virginia and is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
Interview with Ernest Koenig
June 12, 1997 Beginning Tape One, Side A
Answer: -- is Ernest Koenig and we are in my apartment in Watergate at Landmark in Alexandria, Virginia, and today is the 12th of June, 1997.
Question: Like to go back and ask you several questions about your family.
A: Yes.
Q: If you could give -- give a little background about -- about your family, your -- your immediate family --
A: Yes.
Q: -- their names, and -- and occupations of your parents.
A: Yes, yes. My family lived in a little town in southern Moravia, not far from Vienna, about 80 kilometers north of Vienna. I could trace my family back to the 17th and perhaps to the 16th century, and they probably lived there all the time. Perhaps they lived in Vienna, were expelled from there, and then they came back. And it is not impossible, but that’s just a guess, that my parents and the Jews in this area were there in the Roman times, because the Roman -- the limit of the Roman empire was in Vienna, called vie -- viento bona. My father was a glazier, but he had a hardware shop and he was affluent. My mother and her family came from the little town where I was raised, but they were very Viennese. And the whole population there was oriented towards Vienna. Vienna was the great city from which all the good things, and perhaps e-even bad things, emanated. In 1918, this part of Moravia was annexed by the Czechs. The Czech Republic was founded in 1918, but my family, as well as the neighbors and most of the po -- of the population experienced a very strong affinity to Vienna and to Austria.
Q: Did you have brothers or sisters?
A: I had one brother who is still alive, who lives in New York City. I had no sisters. My family was very large and most of the family was destroyed during the Holocaust. The Viennese part and the part living in this little town, and the -- only two cousins and my brother survived.
Q: Is your brother older or younger than you?
A: My brother is 85, I’m 80.
Q: Was your mother a -- a homemaker, managed the home?
A: Yes, my mother was a homemaker. She was a very, very good cook. She was a very -- lady always of good spirit. She was -- she did many good deeds out -- spontaneously. She had poor people, or people who were -- who were in need, and she was a very warm person and also her whole attitude was Viennese. For instance, she would sing all the time, and would sing Viennese songs.
Q: Was your family religious?
A: Well, in my time, only my grandfather was religious. He went every day to the synagogue, but he said it’s nonsense what they are saying there. Yet he insisted to go there because he said one has to maintain the tradition. Not to go there would be a kind of betrayal of our ancestors. And the rest of my family was not religious. At the high holidays they perhaps would to the synagogue, but not otherwise.
Q: What about your family’s politics, your father and mother’s politics?
A: Well, you know, my father had the great experience of the first World War. And he, like all the grownups who lived in my time were against the war, were for democracy, were against the Hapsburgs. So now, as I read history, it turns out that the Hapsburgs were really protectors of the Jews. They were not against the Jews. They used the Jews and protected them, that is to say, at least in the last two centuries, as least since Joseph the second, who contributed to the emancipation of the Jews who lived between 1780 and 1790. He was emperor of Germany.
Q: When Hitler came to power did your -- was your discussion in -- among your f-father and mother ab-about what was going on?
A: Well, it was not only when Hitler came to power. My parents and the whole population was politically very interested, very interested. And I remember that as a little boy, six years old, I saw the Nazis marching with the red flag, with the swastika in their flag. But these people were not considered to be our enemies, because the personal relations with them were very good. So they were in principle against the Jews, but not in practice. And the -- when Hitler won a great victory in the elections of 1830 -- of 1930, then the Nazi wer -- Nazi problem and the Hitler problem became very acute because we knew very well, we understood very well that might affect us.
Q: Were you --
A: So let me say, we followed it very, very, very closely and although I was a young person, I didn’t have much experience, I know a lot about the initial time of the Hitler regime because it fascinated us and we knew, we realized we have a vital interest in it.
Q: Were you close with your brother?
A: Yes. We -- we were very close, even though there was an age difference of five years.
Q: You played together, and --
A: We played together. Of course, he was the -- the model, the role model whom I followed.
Q: Is he still?
A: No, but it’s in a different stage of our life.
Q: I wanted to jump way ahead --
A: Yeah.
Q: -- to your meeting with Elizabeth and your f-friendship with --
A: Yes.
Q: -- with her and the first time you met her.
A: Yeah. Well, we met in Paris in 1939. We were refugees, and we were really at the lowest level of society because we had no country to protect us. The French didn’t like u -- not -- didn’t like us, not personally, but they had too many refugees, there was unemployment in France, and at this time I met Elizabeth in Paris, in the summer of 1939. She went -- she participated in a club of young [indecipherable] and I once came there and participated in this club, too. A kind of club, it wasn't a real club. And that’s where we met. And that was before the outbreak of the war. That was in May 1939 and the war broke out at the beginning of September.
Q: And did you become friends then?
A: Oh, we became friends from the very beginning, right.
Q: What was it that was the attraction between the two of you?
A: Well, that’s very difficult to say. You know, many great philosophers have th -- have thought about the reasons which attract men and women. I think it’s very difficult to say. But it was also a tragic time. We met in May 1939 for the first time, the war broke out at the beginning of September. I volunteered for the army, so we were separated. I came back on leave in December 1939 and then again in -- at Easter time, I think in -- in May -- March or April 1939. And then the war separated us completely, but we met after the war by chance, in a little village in southern France and were for a short while together, but a couple of months later, I was interned in a concentration camp in France. That was after the defeat of France and so we -- we -- we didn’t lose contact, because we were in correspondence, but in December 1941, Elizabeth and her family left France for America. So I didn’t see her from ninet -- from 1940 until 1947 where we met again in England and then we married.
Q: You also were -- you knew her mother and father.
A: Oh yes, I knew her family very well, yes.
Q: What was your relationship with her father?
A: Very friendly relationship. Her father was a very, very highly educated and highly intelligent person, so it was very nice and interesting to talk to him and s -- her mother was a very nice lady and a very friendly lady.
Q: And at one point in the video you said you couldn’t stay with them, you had -- you went off --
A: I couldn’t stay with them because when I was reunited with Elizabeth and with her parents, her parents -- her father was not yet demobilized and they had no money and nothing to eat. I remember the whole family, that is to say, Elizabeth’s father, Elizabeth’s mother, Elizabeth and for a couple of days even I ate the ration which her father got from the military. So one meal for four or five people. That made it impossible to stay there.
Q: Well now I want to jump ahead further, past --
A: Yes.
Q: -- the war, to liberation. And I wanted to ask you what happened -- if you could recount what happened immediately following liberation, where you went.
A: Well, my libern -- liberation is a very long story. I de-decided in -- to evade and not to go along with the SS on their hung -- on their death marches. I was in hiding and then the Russian army came and I went back -- I tried to go back to Czechoslovakia, but there was still war, you couldn’t go back. So I very los -- sl-slowly drifted back to Czechoslovakia and from there to my former home where there was nobody left. And I stayed another year in Czechoslovakia and that was the beginning of communism, but it was not the communists in power, but you felt it. So in 1946 I got a visa to go to England where I stayed another year and then I left England for America and came into America in February 1948.
Q: When -- when -- immediately after you were liberated, what did you have in your possession?
A: Nothing.
Q: Nothing at all.
A: I had nothing. As a matter of fact, four months -- no, no, that’s not correct, two months after my liberation, I got the first document which established my identity. Before -- and I still have it, I had proofs that I was deloused, see, because in Polish towns they tried to prevent the spread of lice, all of us had lice. So they gave you a paper that you have been in a place where they disinfected you.
Q: How was your health, then?
A: My -- I recovered very fast. I had the very good physically constitution, in spite of the fact that I was fo -- over four years in concentration camps, and I was over four years or even longer hungry. And in spite of the fact that wa -- I collapsed twice due to hunger, I recovered very fast. Very, very fast. And I -- my liberation took place in January 1945, and in May, June, I looked absolutely normal and I felt very well.
Q: Do you remember your first full meal after liberation, what that was?
A: Yes, there I got a little bit sick. We crossed the Czech frontier in February 1945 coming from Poland and we were received by chance, by a Jewish family which had been hidden in the mountains and had come back. And they had -- they came back to their own house, there was plenty of food and great comfort and they were extremely friendly to us. And sure, the first meals made me sick, but that was temporary.
Q: You ate too much.
A: I don’t know, but it made me sick.
Q: Had you been thinking when you were in the concentration camp what it was you would want to do when you -- if and when you were freed, or you got your freedom?
A: No, that was impossible, I mean, our main concern was not to be killed. And so what we would do afterwards was beyond us.
Q: So when you were li -- when you got your freedom, what were your plans, what were you thinking?
A: I had no plans, and most of those who survived had no plans, because the impact of the concentration camp was overwhelming and it was very difficult to find your orientation under these new circumstances. We had no plans. And if I had a plan it was later on my wish to be reunited with Elizabeth and to go to America. So if there was any element of a plan, it was America.
Q: Did you know the whereabouts of -- of your parents?
A: Oh yes, I know it very, very wer -- in great detail, for the following reason. When I came back to Brno, to Moravia, there was a man who had been with one foot in the concentration camp. He had converted from Judaism and was Catholic, he had a non-Jewish wife. So he was always supposed to be deported but was not deported. He was a neighbor of ours and a nice man. And he called me and told me the following, that during the war a German soldier came to visit him and brought a message from my father which stated that my f -- my mother had been -- had been massacred together with 30,000 Jewish women -- women and my father and the husbands and the relatives had to look on. And this German soldier was behind where my father and his colleagues were. They were -- they formed a kind of outer chain, then there came my father and the men, then came the SS and then came my mother and all the women, who perhaps had to -- probably wi -- had to dig their own grave. So that was one -- and as proof of the veracity of this story, my father gave to this man, who was a very decent man, who happened to be in the army, a picture of mine, a photo of when I was about 11 years old. A couple of days later I met a young man in [indecipherable]. His name was Spitzer, I still remember it. And th -- after he heard my name, he told me that he had been with my father in a concentration camp in Lublin, and he knew my father very well and he confirmed the story, my father had told him the story which I heard from this former neighbor of ours. And I said goodbye to this young man by the name of Spitzer and two days later it occurred to me, I have to see him again and talk more with him. I couldn’t find him any more.
Q: And when you were liberated, you -- you knew that your father had -- had been killed.
A: When -- you know, I was liberated under very dramatic circumstances, the SS evacuated some 5,000 of those who were with -- had been with me in the camp, that was Auschwitz number three. And there were, however, other prisoners who had come into the camp, and many of them were massacred by the SS after the people who were originally with -- with -- with me in the camp, had been -- had left the camp and were on this -- on these death marches. And the camp was -- th- the SS set fire on the camp and it was very miraculous that I escaped and survived. And it wa -- it was from this camp, which happened to be between the German and the Russian front -- we were in between -- that I escaped into the Russian side and to Poland.
Q: And had you heard news about your father?
A: Oh no. I -- you know, I wasn’t shocked when I heard the story about my -- I was shocked about the way my mother died, but it was self understood for me that my whole family is dead. That was --
Q: You had a feeling.
A: Oh, a feeling, a-a-absolutely sure.
Q: And -- and when was it confirmed, when y --
A: Well, it was confirmed when I talked to these men in -- it was perhaps in June, July 1945.
Q: And he also told you about not only your mother but your father?
A: About my mother, my father, that’s right, yes. Well, fo -- he didn't know about my father. He knew only abou-about my father had -- th-the message of my father and di -- the death of my father was confirmed by this young man, Spitzer.
Q: And what about your brother?
A: My brother was in England.
Q: And did you know that?
A: Oh yes. When I was deported from France, I managed to send him a postcard saying I am returning home, I don’t like it. He understood. I couldn’t say exactly what happened. And it is -- it was probably a French policeman who mailed -- who mailed this card, because I couldn’t mail it.
Q: Was he in -- in Britain for the duration of the war?
A: He was in Britain for the duration of the war, he came shur -- to Britain shortly before the outbreak of the war and he came to the United States in 1948.
Q: You -- how long were you in the town of -- and I don’t know how to pronounce it, Chessikakowa?
