-TITLE- BOROFF, EUGENIA -I_DATE- 9 APRIL, 1991 -SOURCE- ONE GENERATION AFTER\BOSTON
-RESTRICTIONS-
-SOUND_QUALITY- POOR
-IMAGE_QUALITY- FAIR
-DURATION-
-LANGUAGES-
-KEY_SEGMENT-
-GEOGRAPHIC_NAME-
-PERSONAL_NAME-
-CORPORATE_NAME-
-KEY_WORDS-
-NOTES-
-CONTENTS-
Born : 11/30/1922 1. Can you tell us something about your family before the war?
A. Yes. There was my parents, an older brother, and a cousin living with us. She had the same last name and nobody who wasn't family knew she wasn't my sister.
2. Did you grow up in an urban setting?
A. Yes. I grew up in Warsaw. My whole family was from Warsaw.
3. What did your father do?
A. My father was a traveling salesman. Later, he worked for a firm that was making fountain pens in Poland and my father was president
of the firm.
4. Did you mother work at all?
A. My mother worked two, maybe three years before the war. She and my sister had a small candy store on a main street in Warsaw. It was an elegant little store.
5. (tape # 314) What was your family's social status?
A. We were middle class people. I don't think children know how rich their parents were. But we never lacked for anything. We went
to private schools. .
6. Jewish schools?
A. Yes, they were Jewish schools. But they were not strictly Jewish schools. The were just like public schools except the public schools didn't accept Jewish kids. There were only maybe two Jewish children to a classroom. That's why the non-Jewish parents who could afford it sent their children there and the Jewish children didn't have to feel the atmosphere of anti-Semitism.
7. (# 415) Did you get a religious education?
A. Very little. We had a class called "History of Judaism" but I learned very little Hebrew, etc. Mostly what we learned was learned at home. My brother, of course was prepared for the Bar Mitzvah, so he could read Hebrew. I cannot read Hebrew, even today.
8. Did you speak Yiddish at home?
A. No, I could not speak or understand Jewish until the war. In the ghetto, there were so many Jews around I learned to understand.
I learned to speak Jewish from My Husband.
9. Was your family religious?
A. We were not orthodox. But we were religious enough that all
holidays were observed.
10. (5:39) How was your relationship with non-Jews?
A. We didn't have any. I didn't know any non-Jews. The only non Jews were the ones that lived above us. When I was little they invited me to see their Christmas tree. I broke one of the balls and I got so scared I ran away.
11. (6:40) Does that mean that you didn't really experience any
anti-Semitism?
A. We did experience it. But only from street violence. Every year when the school year started, the students would come out into the streets...let me start form the beginning. All the bookstores were
in Jewish hands. .
12. (7:30) What year are you now?
A. I'm talking about my teenage years. The experience I had was when I was fourteen. All the book shops were owned by Jews. When school started, the Polish students used to come out and beat up people going inside. And from our house we had to go to a big park to get to the book shop. That park was the most famous for Jews getting beaten up. You couldn't see a policeman there if you were dying. At that time all the police hid while the students rampaged.
One time I was with my brother going to buy books and the students started after us. We were running and...I must tell you that I didn't look Jewish...they were right behind us. They had sticks with knives on them. I turned to see how far they were behind us.
One of them said, "Oh! They're ours!" And they walked away. That was my closest call with anti-Semitism.
13. Did the Jewish community react in any way?
A. Come on! That was Poland! You sat quiet and tried to avoid
whatever you could.
14. When war became imminent, what options were open to you and
your family?
A. War came suddenly. It was the summer of 1939. I was in a suburb recuperating from an illness. Suddenly my parents came and got me-- two days later war broke out. I could see my mother had stocked a little food. We spent a month in the cellar living on chocolate.
The bombing was so bad you couldn't go up to the apartment.
15. How old were you when war broke out?
A. Sixteen.
16. How did the first news of the war reach you?
A. The first German planes came at five A.M. My brother, me, and my cousin went up to see the fighting in the sky.
17. (1087) How did your family react?
A. It was terror, sheer terror. There was burning all around us.
There was a government building next to us that got bombed--the flames hit our windows. But nothing happened to our building. When the bombing stopped there was terror of the Germans.
18. What decisions did you make?
A. A few days before Warsaw gave up, we started hearing on the radio that all men were to leave Warsaw. It was the Germans trying to create panic. My father and brother left for the East heading towards Russia. We thought it was on Polish government orders. The German planes strafed the refugees on the roads. The big question was to go or not. My brother thought it was a big adventure and wanted to go, so my father went with him.
19. What were your first memories of war after the bombing?
A. Terror of the Germans. I had a friend in the Polish underground who was shot next door.
20. What were some of the first changes your experiences due to
the war?
A. The Germans took everything including my father's firm and mother's shop. Banks were closed and Polish money was no good.
Forty-eight hours after the Germans came the announcements about Jews started. Jews were to be shot if outside after seven P.M. Jews will be shot if they don't obey everything. For a young girl it was like being in a cage. Then they started taking Jews for heavy work.
Then the Poles...you see the Germans didn't know who was a Jew and who wasn't. It was the Poles who pointed out Jews. Men were afraid to go outdoors because they might not come back. They would grab young girls and make them wash floors with their underwear, then wear it-- they raped them. Hunger started right away. People from the outlying communities of Warsaw were brought in and housed in Jewish homes. We were allocated one room of our apartment, in the other was another family. Then my father came home. My brother was in Livov, but when the Russians and Germans went to war, he came
home.
21. Your father and brother had no trouble getting home?
A. Not really. Maybe they smuggled themselves in. Then the Germans made my brother work as an electrician in a factory. Then they took me in. You had to have an occupation--doing work--because the Germans were watching you. I was working for the 55.
22. (1588) How did that feel?
A. We thought that with a job we'd save our lives. That the Germans would leave alone the Jews who worked for them. We had a doctor in our home who'd say, "They'll kill us all." My mother would get very upset at this. He knew what he was talking about.
23. What about the ghetto administration?
A. It was run by the Judenrat and Jewish police. It was bad--people dying in the streets. Everybody had ration cards and when a person died, the family would hide the body to save the ration card.
Pushcarts filled with dead went through the streets all day. The children looked worse than the kids from Biafra.
24. Was everybody working for the SS?
A. No. The Germans had different places to work. The SS handled carpentry and electricity. They used to have their Jews go to the homes of deportees and completely strip the place and send the items home to Germany. My parents were living--you had to live where you worked--in a tailor shop where they repaired uniforms 25. Was there medical care?
A. No
26. Any schools?
A. No.
27. Underground schools? A. Yes, but very limited.
28. (1959) Did people celebrate the holidays?
A. With what? There was no food. It was so bad we were heating our apartment with coal sand from the cellar.
29. Did your parents change?
A. My mother was always a heavy woman, she got to where she could wear my clothes. I was 110 lbs. My father went deaf from a shell burst. He was used to taking care of his family an he was useless.
His life was broken, my mother seemed to take it better. She was selling linens to the Polish police for food. Other families gave her things to sell for them.
30. Any smuggling?
A. Yes, it was mostly the kids.
31. Was there any resistance?
A. The resistance started when the Jews leaned that all would die.
It started with the news from the escapees from Treblinka. I never knew about it until the last minute. The ghetto was burning and we were escaping across rooftops. All of a sudden we saw Germans. In fact they were resistance in disguise. They took us into a safe cellar. I was with my mother. I lost my father on the roofs. My brother died in the uprising in Treblinka II. My mother died on the
train to Majdanek.
32. (2353) Were you with her?
A. MMMMM...[affirmative nod] 33. You were in seven different concentration camps? A. Seven? No,
six.
34. Could you tell how your reached to camps and the first camp?
A. The first one was when the Germans found us in the cellar. They shot all the men and put the women in the trains--120 people to a car--half the people died. I was unconscious most of the trip. When the train stopped, the doors opened and the guards yelled "Juden raus!" I looked for my mother, it was night and I crawled over corpses looking for her. A guard yelled and knocked me out of the car with a rifle butt. They kept us in Lublin the night. Then they formed us into fives and marched us to the camp [Mydonyck]. We ran and those who couldn't keep up were finished off with dogs.
We had to take showers and I didn't care if I lived or died. They gave us camp clothes--we looked like clowns--and then sent us into barracks and then ~to work. We had to move heavy stones from one end of camp to the other and return them on the next day. People were whipped to make them walk faster. After seve weeks we were sent to Schareschko Kameyena [spelling] after a selection of all
the young girls.
They gave us new dresses. I went to a factory--it seemed like heaven because we had regular meals--I worked twelve hour days.
Winter came and I was in a summer dress and barefoot. My feet became infected due to the frost. My job was to load a machine with empty bullets. Finally I couldn't stand it any longer. I went to the Lagerfurher and said, "Look I want to work for you. I'm a good worker and strong but I'm cold. Could I get something to wear?" He took me to a warehouse and gave me a heavy coat and boots.
(28:00) Then the Germans sent us to Chelsterhau [spelling] which was much nicer because in the other camp typhus was rampant. Here it was warm with good food. I was packing bullets. If they found a bullet on you, you were shot. I had a good friend from Warsaw. We were smuggling ribbon from packing boxes to the Poles for one Szloti per ribbon. I would pull the ribbon out of the box, rip up the box, wrap the ribbon around my legs to hide it, and sell the ribbon for bread. We managed to sell enough to get bread and survive. The Russians approached and we were marched in December to trains. We were on the trains for 3 weeks without food or water. When we finally got to Ravensbruck, we couldn't walk. It was worse than Mydonyck, People killed each other like animals. Then they sent us to Bulgau [spelling] for four weeks.
(3191) Then we went to Turkheim. At Turkheim we hear of approaching Americans and moved to Allach [spelling]. On the way we were strafed at a crossroads. We managed to escape into the forest. We had to come up with a way to disguise our numbers so we pretended to be Polish forced labor and went to beg food from the Germans.
That night it rained. You know, in all my time in the camps, neither I nor anybody else had a cold. We saw a house with some Swedes in its. They said the Americans were coming. We stayed the night in a barn and in the morning heard tanks outside. We thought it was the Germans but when we saw the American star we sobbed in
relief.
When the Americans saw us I thought they'd cry. They made the Germans civilians take care of us. A few days later I caught typhus. I went to a Red Cross hospital near Turkheim and recovered
after three weeks.
(3455) I met my future husband there. We went into the mountains to a resort to recuperate. I started working for a doctor in a refugee camp and I got married.
35. What was your relationship with the Germans?
A. The Germans had no idea of concentration camps.
TAPE TWO 36. They treated you well?
A. Yes but they were false inside. They treated us with silk gloves. They were terrified of Jews for what they've done. I don't know anybody that did the smallest thing to the Germans. It's too bad because the best of them should hang.
37. How many years were you in the camps?
A. Over two years 38. (349) Did you have any experience with kapos?
A. No, I was twice beaten up in camp by SS women guards. I never got a real beating though. They used to beat people half-dead.
I saw courageous girls. In Mydonyck there was a girl who ran away and was caught. They were about to hang her in front of the whole camp. The commandant asked, "If I were to let you go, forgive you.
What would you do?" She said, "I would run away again." and spat in his face. He hung her then and left her hanging for three days. I heard of one girl who grabbed a German's gun and shot him.
39. What gave you hope?
A. I don't know, my youth. I wanted to live and not die like an
animal 40. Did you have any relations with non-Jews in the camps?
A. No the non-Jews weren't in the Jewish barracks. They were free to do what they wanted to do to Jews and the Germans wouldn't stop them--they could steal your shoes.
41. Were you always with women?
A. Always, we didn't see any men.
42. (7:24) Did you know about the gas chambers?
A. Yes.
Q. When?
A. In Warsaw--escapees from Treblinka, but nobody believed them.
When you tell American kids the stories they say, "How could you go like a lamb to death?" They can't understand that you're helpless with empty hands surrounded by guns. When you walk you think you'll survive by not being noticed. People say, "I wouldn't go like a lamb to death!" I hope not.
I hope nobody is in that situation again.
43. Was there any other resistance? A. In the ghetto or the camps?
Q. Either.
A. In the camps the Germans had complete control. People could talk but they were powerless. People talked only of food and hunger.
44. Were there Jews responsible for overseeing other Jewish
inmates?
A. Yes.
45. Can you talk about it?
A. There was no justification for what they were doing. They were told that if they did what the Germans wanted, they would live. The Jewish Police in Warsaw were terrible. They had quotas--when there were no more people in the street to grab--they sent their elderly mothers to the trains. But they came to the same end, dead. There are Jews today who are afraid to go to Israel because of what they
did.
46. (12:04) You talked about selection? A. Yes, I was always chosen to work because I looked athletic and strong.
47. Did you ever use false papers?
A. I had them but I didn't want to go alone out as a false Christian from the ghetto.
48. You could have left?
A. Yes but I am at peace with my self because I didn't. There are no questions about what might have been in spite of what I
suffered.
49. What was the difference between what you knew of the camps in the ghetto and reality?
A. In the beginning people were fooled with promises of benefits in the camps. When nobody came back people got suspicious. When people escaped from the crematoria, nobody wanted to go. That's when they started grabbing people off the streets. I had a cousin who was
shot hiding.
50. What were your thoughts on hearing these things while in
Warsaw? A. I remember being so afraid.
51. Did you meet people you knew in the camps?
A. Not many. Few people from Warsaw lived. I only have a third cousin now in Israel. I was working in Boston at a Yeshiva and all of a sudden a couple of exchange students from Israel came in.
I asked their names and they said "Messinger". I said that was my mother's maiden name. It turned out that the man was my cousin
Benjamin's son.
52. (20:24) Did you search for family? A. Yes, I put out word in Germany that I was alive.
53. Where did you go at the end of the war?
A. My husband was president of the Bad-Listov Jewish community. We lived in rooms requested by the Americans for Jews.
54. How did you decide to stay?
A. Where were we to go? We wanted to go to America but we had to
wait.
55. What was your life like in Germany?
A. Not much. There was nothing to do. The last year there my husband opened a small fur shop.
56. You could make a living?
A. We were supported by the Americans.
57. Where did you come to in the U.S.? A. We came to Atlanta. Six weeks later we came to Boston.
58. How do you feel your experience changed your values?
A. I know what's important. I with I could have family and no terrible memories and nightmares and not to lose so many friends.
Material goods aren't important but in a normal society, you want the. I told my kids that education was important because that was something that could never be taken from you. My kids joke that my cupboards are overstuffed. They call it "Holocaust leftovers"
[laughs].
59. What kept you going?
A. The will to live. When I was freed, I felt like I'd won the war.
I wanted to see them loose. I wanted to see them suffer and paid back. At least there was the sense of "You couldn't kill me!" 60. (04:45) Have you always shared your experiences?
A. When survivors get together it's all they talk about. I don't think I specifically told my kids I was a survivor. But they say
they always knew.
61. How religious were you after the war?
A. I'm a national Jew, not a religious Jew. Both my kids went to a Yeshiva for a while, I wanted them to know they were Jewish.
62. Can you share you experiences with non-survivors?
A. Not really. They either can't understand or they pity you.
There's something in all survivors that we feel best in our own
company.
63. Did you apply for reparations? A. I'm getting a pension from
Germany.
64. What feelings do you have for your homeland? A. Poland is not my home. I'm split between Israel and the U.S.
65. Do you think another holocaust is possible?
A. I don't know. I think the U.S. is too lenient on Neo-Nazis and the KKK. That's how the holocaust started.
66. Is there anything else you would like to say?
A. [softly] That was very bad memories. [direct quote]
. END.
