United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Betsy Cohen
April 27, 2006
RG-50.030*0507
PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a videotaped interview with Betsy Cohen, conducted on April 27, 2006 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
BETSY COHEN
April 27, 2006
Beginning Tape One
Question: Good morning, Betsy.
Answer: Good morning, Joan.
Q: It’s -- it’s -- it’s very nice to see you here. Tell me --
A: Thank you. It’s good to be here.
Q: Good, I’m glad. Tell me what was your name when you were born.
A: Was the same as it is now, because my husband had the same last name.
Q: Uh-huh. So tell me what --
A: It’s Betsy Edith Cohen.
Q: It’s Betsy Edith Cohen. And when were you born?
A: In ’28. 1928.
Q: And what was the -- the month and the day?
A: The day was a Monday, I was told, of April 23rd.
Q: April 23rd. And where were you born?
A: In Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
Q: Right. Now, what I’d like us to do is talk a little bit about what your life was like before the Nazis came. So I’d like to know about your f -- your family and your house and all of that. So let me first ask you about your father, I know you were very close to your father. What -- what did he do?
A: Well, my father was a pastry baker, and he had a coffee house, I think you’d call it a coffee house here, in the heart of Amsterdam. And then the depression came, and he couldn’t keep it up. But my mother was an accountant, so then my mother took over and became the breadwinner.
Q: Uh-huh. But your -- your father also was a pastry chef on a ship, right --
A: Yes, he worked --
Q: -- on the -- was it the Dutch Holland line?
A: Yeah.
Q: And that was before you were born?
A: Yes.
Q: Yes. So do you remember him baking in the house? A: Oh yes. He baked every Sunday, something --
Q: Yes?
A: -- very good.
Q: Yep. So he was a good chef, he was a good pastry chef?
A: I think so --
Q: You think so.
A: -- they -- they wanted him to go a bit after the first World War, and at that time he said, I’ve had enough, I want to settle down.
Q: Uh-huh.
A: And they really put the pressure on him to go, and he didn’t want to go. And as it happened, that ship was torpedoed.
Q: Really? So that was fortunate that he said no, wasn’t it, yes.
A: That he said no.
Q: So what kind -- how do you remember him during those early years as a father? What was -- what was he like?
A: He was a kind, patient, tolerant, wonderful person.
Q: Yes? Did he have a good sense of humor?
A: Oh yes --
Q: Yeah?
A: -- that too, yes.
Q: And did you do things with him alone? Did he take you for walks?
A: Yes.
Q: He did. And so did you have conversations with him about what you were doing, or -- or did you --
A: Do you mean just before the war?
Q: Before the war, --
A: Yeah.
Q: -- yes. When -- when you had these walks.
A: We --
Q: Were you --
A: Well, he walked me to school, he walked me to grade school that first year.
Q: Really?
A: Mm-hm. That’s a 10 minutes walk.
Q: So that’s nice.
A: And he took me in every day like that.
Q: Did he pick you up as well, or did you walk home by yours --
A: Yes.
Q: He picked you up also?
A: Mm-hm. For a little while.
Q: Uh-huh. So was he working at all, or at a certain point he wasn’t working, he was --
A: No, he wasn’t working.
Q: He wasn’t working. So who cooked meals in the house?
A: Well, supposedly Mother hired a young lady to -- to help her in -- with the laundry.
Q: Right.
A: And with cooking. And we didn’t always have the same young lady.
Q: Right.
A: But one time we had one who came from Starving, Germany, who was happy to be in the Netherlands.
Q: Really.
A: And she was very young, and we became the closest of friends. And she lived in --
Q: Uh-huh, right.
A: -- with us. And she took me to the movies, and walks, and -- and she was Catholic, and she showed me all these beautiful images of Jesus Christ, and -- and Mother Maria, and I was just fascinated by that.
Q: Really? Did she take you to church?
A: No.
Q: She didn’t?
A: No.
Q: But she showed you these pictures, and all --
A: The pictures.
Q: I see. Did she live insi -- in the apart --
A: In the house.
Q: -- in the house.
A: Yeah, we had s -- we had the spare room.
Q: Right. And how long was she with you, do you think? Do you remember?
A: I would say probably three years.
Q: That’s a long time.
A: Yes.
Q: And at what -- do you remember approximately what age you were when she was there?
A: Yes, mm-hm, four and a half, three and a half, five and a half. I think she left when I went to grade school.
Q: So you were a really young kid.
A: Yes.
Q: And was -- this was before your sister was born?
A: Yes.
Q: Uh-huh. So was it odd for you to have your father at home and your mother be the breadwinner, was that an odd circumstance?
A: Not for me.
Q: Not for you, but for -- wi -- in terms of what you saw around you, is it --
A: I didn't compare.
Q: You didn’t compare, uh-huh.
A: I didn't compare.
Q: Well, that’s good.
A: I -- I didn’t realize it, I didn’t know.
Q: Right, right.
A: You know, the working, so forth, family --
Q: Sure.
A: -- and what -- who should have what role.
Q: Right.
A: To me, this is what was happening, and so I accepted it.
Q: Right.
A: I wasn’t thinking about that.
Q: What was your mother like?
