OSCAR HABER May 17 & May 30, 2000 Tape 1, Side A [Copy-checked and partially authenticated by A.D.—9/1/05]
Q: Okay, it’s May 17th, 2000 and we’re conducting an interview with Mr. Oscar Haber here in his home in Lexington, Kentucky and this is an interview for the Holocaust Survivors in Kentucky Interview Project, which is being sponsored by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, as well as the Kentucky Oral History Commission. We are doing an interview that will focus mostly on Mr. Haber’s experiences after the Holocaust because he has been interviewed before by the Survivors of the Shoah Foundation. And there is a videotape that is available through the Shoah Foundation. My name is Arwen Donahue and this is tape number one, side A. Mr. Haber, let’s start with your date of birth.
A: March 8th, 1910.
Q: And you talked about, in your other interview and by the way if we ever repeat anything, we’ll try to just cover things that we haven’t talked about before. But I’m sure that you don’t remember everything that you said and didn’t say, so I might remind you sometimes if we’ve already talked about something. But in your other interview you did mention that you went, you had an unusual opportunity, you were growing up in a small town, in a shtetl and you were one of nine children, and you had an unusual opportunity to attend a high school, a public high school and eventually became a dentist. And I’m wondering how it happened that you had this opportunity to study in a public high school and where the high school was?
A: The high school was in Debica, which is in the district of Krakow and that was about nine kilometers of my village where I was born. And we had, from the age of three, in our house, always a teacher, special for religious purposes. But by this same occasion we were studying normal classes. So in the age of four I could already go in the village to the first class of public school and I still was a good pupil, because no one of them was on the level I was. But I finished there the fourth year and my father decided I have to go into the small city, which was Debica there. In the same time, he put us in a quarter, that means to live in the house of a Rabbi, which was teaching us the Hebrew and the religious teachings. In the same time I went to the Polish public school. And that was a very difficult experience because we have to get up in the morning at six o’clock, sometimes earlier, and before we went to the public school in the morning for eight o’clock it started, we had already to pray and to learn Hebrew and to learn everything about religious life. And more and more. So, I was there about six years living with this Rabbi. At the same time after I graduated from the normal school, from the seven classes, I applied to the high school, but I was too young. Because it was already that you can go to school, start school only by the age of seven, and I was four years old. But I was somehow fortunate, my father knew the director of this high school. And he spoke with him and he said, “Well I cannot do it. He has to go normal now to the sixth class at least, at least and to repeat.” And my father said, “You know, make him a test.” And I got a test and I passed the test, but still he couldn’t take me. I had to repeat the seventh grade another year. And then I was accepted to the high school. And there I matriculated there and so I continued my studies.
Q: So, what language did you speak at home?
A: Well, the first language we spoke, that was Yiddish. My father was very religious and he want us to know the Yiddish, we are spoken. But we had Polish Gentile servants, too, so we have to speak Polish too. And surrounded by peasants who are speaking Polish and you have to knew the language. In the school was Polish of course. When I went to school in Debica there was in the fourth class was already German, too. So I had German, Polish and Yiddish, and of course, Hebrew, which was, it was the liturgical language, to pray. At the age of three we started already to learn Hebrew and we knew the Hebrew alphabet and we knew to pray and most of the prayings until today, I know by heart. Most of the thick books, we learn, we have to do it. And the first when you opened eyes at the religious house, the first is to wash your hands, that’s the first things. And to make a blessing about the washing the hands and you make a blessing for the food and you have to thank God that you got up in the morning. That was the first Hebrew praying and that was at the age of three. At the age of four we started already to learn the Torah, which is the Bible, the Old Testament. And so we continued to, so therefore I am quite acquainted about religious Jewish life. And then later on, of course, in high school we learned about, in the public school we learned about history and that was very interesting, world history, too. And German literature. And therefore I, until today, I am quite acquainted with the world literature and especially the German literature and the Hebrew, of course. And the Yiddish. So, this is the way like it was. It was a very hard thing, because the distance to the town was like I said about nine kilometers, eight or nine kilometers. I don’t remember exactly. And for Saturday we used to go home, I mean to the village. And when we came to the village Saturday, there was the traditional Friday evening meal with the praying, with everything. In our house was there a minyan, which is the quorum of ten people which is praying, Jews, by Jewish law. And my late father, by himself with his own funds, he founded a Torah. He let scribe it, and we had a new Torah in our house and there was a praying in our house and my father was the master of the ceremony. And the people from the villages around, which were few, not always was there the quorum of ten people. But Saturday morning was always a praying in quorum. If it wasn’t quorum, so how many it was, but it was the normal pray. And we had to know it and to participate. And that was in afternoon, my father take a sleep one hour and he took us in the room, me and my brother, because my older brother was with me in the school at this Rabbi. He was sitting down and we had to repeat what we learned all the week. My father wanted to know what we learned and how far we are continuing to progress. And that was the way like it was in our house. Of course, Saturday was like in the Torah is resting day. And that was the religious way of life. Nothing was working, nobody was working, even the servants. Only to feed the animals, to milk the cows and that what was doing. But not working in the field, not other work was performed. Only the most necessary for surviving, which was necessary.
Q: You mentioned that one of the towns nearby, Ropczyce, had a strong Hasidic tradition. Did your family have any Hasidic ties or traditions?
A: My father by himself was a Hasid. But he didn’t go to Ropczyce because the old Ropczyce Rabbi wasn’t more. The founder of the Hasidic movement which was Reb Nafthali, which you know. And he was no more alive. There was already third or fourth generation there and there was no potential Rabbi which could, which could affinate (ph) my father there. My father used to go to Sans (ph) , which was quite a distance, about fifty miles. To go for holidays there to the Rabbi of Sans (ph). Also sometimes OfBobof (ph), which is also a little shtetl there in the surroundings of Sans (ph). They were the very famous Rabbis, which is the continuation of this Rabbis is now here in the United States. They are siblings and family offsprings, which are continue this Hasidic movement of Bobof (ph) and of Sans (ph). And that was, my father was a Hasid of them. He wasn’t, by himself, he wasn’t a blind Hasidic. He wasn’t overdoing. But the basic religious things were holy for him. And that was my father. Of course my mother did everything what my father said to do. The thing was, my father, his first wife passed away. And from his first wife, gave birth a daughter and by the birth she passed away. He was a young widower. He was already thirty-five or thirty-six years old and a matchmaker found him a girl of sixteen years somewhere in another village there. And she came to live with him, and she was my mother. She gave birth to the nine children. And we were in touch with our sister, because Jewish law recognize it, one child, when it is from the same father, is a sibling, more even than one mother. That is the religious way and tradition. Interesting enough, our sister, she married a very interesting man, who was, in the beginning he was a teacher in our house, teaching us the religious ways. He was very educated in Jewish Talmudic teachings. And he married her, and he succeeded, he became quite a rich man. And she gave birth to eight children. And there are only two children survived and they are still living. One is ninety-two years old, lives in the United States. And the other one is eighty-five years, that’s the youngest one, eighty-four years old, lives in Israel.
Q: These would be your nieces and nephews actually. Right? Officially. Your sister’s children?
A: Are?
Q: They would be your nieces and your nephews?
A: Yeah, they are my nieces and we are in touch with them and we are very much in good relations. And very interesting story about these two nieces. Both of them survived the Holocaust. The one married in the war and had a daughter in the war. And she escaped, run away, being pregnant from Debica, I mean this village there, to Lvov, which was in the Ukraine. Then it was belonged to Poland, but the Russian invaded this part of the country, of Polish country. And she, when she saw the disaster in the ghetto, she put her child under a convent’s door. And was looking from far away what happened to this child. And she saw that a nun came out and she took in the child in the house. And then she ran away and she became a servant, as a Polish girl, as a Gentile at the head of the Gestapo in Lvov. That was the older one. The younger one had a friend in Lvov. She was in Lvov studying sewing, to be a seamstering. Mother, very good seamster, which she was. And she met there a boy, before the war he was leader already of the trade unions. And when the Russian came in… in the beginning he was a very big shot. But when the Russians, when the German invaded, he went with the Russian back to Russia and there he joined the Polish Army, which was organized there by the Poles after their agreement, the Polish agreement in exile with the Russians, which allowed them to organize their Army, which was affiliated to the Russian Army. And they were fighting. And he was fighting the Germans until Berlin. And he put her on a Polish family. She was a seamster and she gave birth to a daughter, but that was already in 1945 when the war is going to end. When he came from Russia to Poland with the invasion, I mean to fight with the Russian Army. And then she gave birth to this daughter. And when the war was coming to an end, he became a governor of a part which was annected from Poland from the German territory there. And he took her there, and they had another two sons, but they not living as Jews. And they very talented boys. And when it came in Poland the time where Jews moved from Poland to Israel in 1965 I guess, was it? Something like this. They came, first time she told the sons that they are Jewish and they were already both matriculated after high school diploma. And one of them was already studying engineering. And they came to Israel. But their father, himself, he in the meantime, being a governor he studied at the university at the same time to become an agronom… agronomy. And he came to Israel as an agronom. But because Israel didn’t have confidence to all these apparatchiks from Poland. I mean all this communist active parties, he couldn’t find a job. It was very difficult to find. And we were already at this time in Israel and I had some connection with people and to a member of the Israel Parliament. And I wrote to them and I warranted about him, that he’s not one of the Russian services and he got a job in agronomy. But he passed away about six or seven years ago. In the meantime, the older son is working in a very high, secret Israel Army factory. And the other son was also an engineer, but in the same time he was teaching in a school, in a vocational school. And married a girl from Venezuela. And one year ago they decided that they leave Israel and they came to the United States. And he got a job here in California. He must be very, very important engineer, because he got the, he made the green card and he can work and they bought a house. But they have one son, who is at the Israel Army. And just now I heard, two weeks ago, he went to Israel and asked to give him some off in the Army. And he came to visit him here to the United States. He will not stay. He will go back to Israel. But he decided, his wife and with the other two children to stay in the United States.
Q: Sounds as if you’ve kept in pretty close touch with whatever members of your family have survived.
A: Oh yeah, whatever I have. I have two brothers. I have a second cousin, who was… they were all in camps. And they are living here in the United States. My brothers and my second cousins. Are we are trying to keep all together here.
Q: Let’s go back to the time that we were talking about before the war. Did you end up going to high school then because your father wanted you to have oppor… special opportunities?
A: Yes.
Q: That normally your other siblings wouldn’t have had?
A: High school, further studies wasn’t the main purpose of my father. My father would have very much liked me to go on and study Jewish, maybe Rabbinical even studies. But I was very stubborn and I was in very difficult conditions, making my study very difficult. Often in hunger, often have to work and to gain my life. But I did it. And I’m happy I did it.
Q: So it was really your, becoming a dentist was something that you really wanted to do.
A: I, that was my idea. That was my idea and there was also an idea which I got from a cousin of mine who was a dentist in the other place there. And I liked the way like he was living. I was enjoying more the free life. This religious life didn’t match my character. I wasn’t never, never… even being young, following all the instructions and prescriptions, but I was never strictly convinced that that was what I want to do. I was always looking on the broad world, and life was for me, more interesting outside the religious life.
Q: You mentioned in your first interview that you were a Polish patriot.
A: Yes.
Q: Were you politically interested or involved in Polish… well, were you interested in Polish politics?
A: No, no, no, no. I was, deep in my soul I was Jewish, but I found that we are living in a Polish country, this is Poland and this is our homeland and we owe to be loyal to our country. That’s wherever I am, I found my obligation to be honest and I could avoid serving in the Polish Army which wasn’t easy. It wasn’t easy. It was very difficult. But it wasn’t voluntary, because Poland was an Army which was called to the Army. That was not a voluntary army. You have to go, by twenty-one everyone has to go to the army except that somebody is unable to fulfill the demand, sick and so forth. And a lot of my colleagues and a lot of Jewish people usually they started to do everything to avoid to go into the Polish Army. I didn’t try it even. And I did it full hearted and I think it was my obligation to do it, because I owe it. I understand that it is a common responsibility when you are a citizen of a country, you live there, you have to do what belongs. But politically I was never involved in any movement, never any movement.
Q: Not…
A: I loved Poland. I loved the country. It gave us opportunity and then that’s it. I did what I had to do.
End of Tape 1, Side A Tape 1, Side B
Q: Tape one, side B. Were you involved in any Zionist organizations?
A: It was a time I was involved in Zionist organization. It was a time I thought maybe one has to go to Palestine those times. I will not deny there was not in Poland anti-Semitism. But you know anti-Semitism until today has many faces. There is an economic anti-Semitism, there is a political anti-Semitism and there is a racist anti-Semitism. And for me and my observance, my conviction, I think if I analyze the Jewish situation in Poland, it was more economic anti-Semitism, with some reasons, objective reasons. They were nobody’s fault, but the situation became so that this anti-Semitism has his logical reasons, logical reasons, maybe it shouldn’t be, maybe it is nobody’s fault, but it was. I cannot say there was a racial anti-Semitism. Well, there is in every nation, there are some extreme people, which they can get… and they are more doing it for personal reasons and for gaining something of it. And this is also the political anti-Semitism, which is to gain something to rule over people. You know? And Jews were more educated, absolutely more educated than the common people in Poland. Because as I told you before, I started to study when I was three. You know, and this gives, whatever you study, it gives you more advance about people which are just starting to study something at the age of eight or nine or ten even. Some of them didn’t go to school, the Polish people didn’t go to school ever. There was illiteracy, too. So, when it came to elections, the Jews, they knew what they wanted. And the masses didn’t know. Maybe it is until today a lot of masses don’t know when they are going to vote, what they need and what they want. It is until today everywhere. But especially in a country like Poland, which was, which wasn’t so educated. There was a lot of people who didn’t have, it was only by propaganda, which was from mouth to mouth, from promises and so forth, you know. And then Poland, I would need to go into the situation of Poland, how Poland became free after being occupied by three countries.
Q: Well let’s not get into overall historical…
A: Yeah, I understand. I understand, but the Jews even, in each occupied party, had different opportunities. In the Russian occupied part they couldn’t progress like this we could make in the Austro-Hungarian or in the German occupied territory. So here comes the difference. Education, knowledge and education, that was, is and that would always be the point. And this gave also the impulse for political views and for a kind of organized anti-Semitism, which for the Jews, for the victims, it is not important what kind of anti-Semitism it is. He is anti-Semite, why and what, we didn’t analyze and that wasn’t important. We had to feel it and that what it is.
Q: When you were in the Army then, in 1935 and ‘36, did you, were you primarily with non-Jewish Poles?
A: Oh yeah.
Q: And how was that?
A: Ten percent was Jews. It was the same, approximately the same relative like it was, the population was about ten percent and there was about ten percent was in the Army.
Q: Were you discriminated against at all for being Jewish during your service?
A: It’s difficult to say that you were discriminating because Army is not the thing which gives you the time. You have so many things to do that you don’t have the time to play these games. But, but, the officers, the Polish officers generally, generally, were anti-Semites. What kind? They were so educated, they were so prepared. That was the elite. That they, but of course, they didn’t, they didn’t want to show up as anti-Semites. But you could feel it, you could feel it. Not everybody felt it. And then like I said, the poorer Jews went to the Army because they were not able to pay to get free from the Army, not to serve. The rich Jews who didn’t want to go to the Army, there was always finding a way of bribery. To whom? To the Polish officers, to the Polish doctors, to the Polish secretaries, so that they made themselves sick and they write and they are sick and they cannot serve. And so the poor and little Jews were serving in the Army. There were no too many of the intelligentsia which was serving in the Army. And then there was another thing. After matriculation you are going to the officer’s school. And in the officer’s school, they didn’t want the Jews to become officers. They were there because they were, after matriculation that was the law. So usually they find always a way to send them back to the normal Army, not to live in the school to become an officer. There were officers, Jewish officers, but very few, very few. It was difficult to advance, to be a Jew and to be an officer, a high officer in the Polish Army. There were higher officers only medical officers, because they needed them. They have to take them and that’s what it was.
Q: So, by the time you were in the Service, you were a dentist, were you a dentist already?
A: Yes.
Q: Yeah, so you were, your goal was just to do the service and then get out. Is that right?
A: Yeah. When the time came to go out, I got a phone from Krakow that one doctor who was by himself a Colonel in the Polish Army, doctor, dentist. He had private office. He was ready to retire and he had a private office. But he got a heart attack and they took him to hospital. And they phone to me, they knew that I would go liberated, if I will be able to replace him, to fill out that position. So the last day in the Polish Army… and even the greatest anti-Semite in my unit, came to me, they make me a party, my departure, that was ad hoc make a party for me. He came to me, he said, “You know I am twenty years in the Polish Army. I am professional officer, high officer. I’m a major there.” He said, “You are the first Jew I know had such a good time in the Army like you have. Like you had.” And I said to them good bye, and I left. And immediately the next day I came to Krakow and I start to work because I had to fulfill this, this… later on he was released from the hospital. He survived and he came to the office, but I still was working with him. He couldn’t work anymore. So I was working with him about a year and a half, something like this. And then I opened my own office.
Q: But you said you didn’t have such a good time in the… did you have a good time socially? Is that what he meant? That you got along with other officers?
A: Oh yeah. I had a good time, well I got along. They were all, needed me because I was there practicing dentistry. After the first, first recruiting, six months, then later on I organize a clinic and I receive patients. So they had their families and they were coming to me and I had really a good time. I came from the Army with some saved money, which the families of these officers paid to me for services. That was very, very, very little payments, but still I came with quite nice saved money.
Q: You mentioned in your other interview that you were involved with the underground army. The Armia Krajowa. How did you get involved with the army and when?
A: In 1942, when we fled, went with the, on the Aryan papers, so-called. We came to a strange village there. And there the lady, which was the owner of the farm which we were given the address from the priest to go. That was his sister-in-law. Where I was there on this farm, there the Armia Krajowa started to organize herself. And we came there, and I went there as a refuge, refugee from the occupied territory, German-occupied territory which occupied Poland from Poznan. I said I am from Poznan, and I am hiding away because I was a Polish officer and I am hiding from the German Army. So when they became knowledge, they turned to me and maybe I will join them. And I said, “Well I cannot be a fighter to go and, with your fighting.” I went with them sometimes. But I organized a sanitary station, when some of them were wounded they brought them to me and I gave them some bandages or some treatments, which I had a sanitary station. And I also took care on the weapons which they had, and the magazine. They had some magazine in hiding in the shelter. And they had some weapons there, which they organize somehow. And I was taking, cleaning and taking care of it. And that was my function, I was going there and there, I was going close to every night I am going there and taking care of it. There were some actions which I am participating, but I was never going in the first line to go to fight with the Germans. Never, ever.
Q: Were you afraid at all or nervous that they would find, that they would check up on your story about having been an officer in Poznan and find out about your identity?
A: First of all, there was a case when somebody, the German has, in every village, in every town they had… will you lay down? Lay down…
Q: I have to…
