United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Stanley Kiersnowski
June 20, 2014
RG-50.030*0737
PREFACE The following interview is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
STANLEY KIERSNOWSKIPRIVATE
June 20, 2014
Question: This is a United States Holocaust Memorial Museum interview with Mr. Stanley Kiersnowski, on June 20th, 2014, in Nutley, New Jersey. And thank you Mr. Kiersnowski for agreeing to speak with us, for agreeing to tell your story and what your experiences were before and during and after World War II. I appreciate it.
Answer: Okay, you’re welcome.
Q: I want to start by asking the basic questions. Could you tell me what your name was at birth, where you were born, and the date of your birth.
A: I was born Stanislaw Kiersnowski. Doctor baptized me, actually when he slapped me, he said another Stanislaw [indecipherable] because he knew my grandfather. I was born [indecipherable] in a clinic in Wilno, at that time it was Poland, on August 17, 1926.
Q: Okay.
A: And my mother was very happy because they couldn’t exchange me, because I was the only boy in the whole clinic.
Q: She couldn’t lose you.
A: No.
Q: She couldn’t lose you. Were – did you have any brothers and sisters?
A: I have a sister, Anna Kiersnowski, but she was seven years older than I was.
Q: So she – so you were the youngest child?
A: I – I was – th-there were two, and then when my mother had the miscarriage, and I didn’t know about it til we were going to India. And an Indian colonel on the ship looked at her hand and he said, you had a miscarriage, you lost a boy.
Q: Oh my goodness, oh my goodness.
A: I hope you don’t mind I say something like this, because –
Q: Oh no, no, I think it’s wonderful. I think it’s wonderful but it’s – it’s such a mystery, you know, that – that somebody would take a look on someone’s hand and be able to tell.
A: Yeah. And he told me, never show your hand to anybody.
Q: Really?
A: That same colonel, he said – I don’t know why, but he said no.
Q: Okay. Tell me about your mother a little bit. What kind of a person was she? Who was her father?
A: Well, her mother –
Q: And mother.
A: – my mother was, I think, very intelligent, very intelligent woman, very brilliant. As I told you, she was – she came from very wealthy family. They had governess from Ireland, from eng – from Germany and from France. So there were five children, so they all spoke right away English, German, French and Polish. The boys were learning Russian, but the – the girls, three girls were not learning Russian. They were not allowed own – to speak Russian at home, because Poland was occupied. So, it was like resentment. But later on, of course, she learned Russian. And she understood Italian and she understood Spanish. From knowing those languages, when we came to America they often ask her when she was in a hospital, to be translator for the people that they couldn’t communicate with, you know, so th-they could [indecipherable]
Q: So she – so she learned this –
A: At home.
Q: – at home, and at home was where? Where was her home?
A: Th-The home was in [indecipherable] and this was Ru-Rudakow(ph). It was very large estate, because it was 12,000 hectares. It was a very large estate over there. A lot of people were coming there. There was a big house, of course. It used to be this was Horvath’s(ph) property, actually. My grandfather married a Horvath girl. They were of Hungarian origin. And not fu – far from there, they had a beautiful palace actually. My mother said everything was carved over there. It was right on the river [indecipherable] and in – and there’s no sign of those buildings left, everything was completely destroyed.
Q: So it was – she was – a-and came from a landed gentry family.
A: Oh yeah, she was very gentry.
Q: Very gentry.
A: You see, I found out here in America that when there were balls in – they had apartment houses they owned in Kiev, and they ha – owned a place i-in Minsk. And this one woman here, she married later the richest man in Poland, Boldanovitch(ph), and they were talking about their childhood. And she said [indecipherable] whenever you came with your sister to the dance, all the men were bending in half to dance with you, because everybody knew your money. My mother told me that each one of them had hundred thousand rubles put in Kiev in the bank as dowry, and it was in – it was in gold, you know. It was a lot of money too, but it wasn’t in Switzerland [indecipherable] the money.
Q: Yeah.
A: But the [indecipherable] grandfather put it in there, and the revolution came and that was the end of the gold.
Q: Oh dear, oh – so, in other words, that way of life that she was born into all changed with World War I and the end of the revolution.
A: Wi-With the revolution.
Q: The Russian – the Bolshevik revolution.
A: You see, my mother always thought they had several cars over there, and one car was Minerva called. And when I came to America I work with very rich people in the brokerage, all of them are millionaires, and one I told him that my mother always talk about Minerva, oh it was car made in Switzerland, it was 25,000 in America before the first World War.
Q: Oh my gosh. Oh my gosh.
A: So you know, from that I got what they had because I only saw pictures of that place when I was small. But y-you know, they never bragged, they never bragged about anything and anything. They were t – we were told from childhood to be very helpful to people, to be nice to people, to be polite to everybody. If anybody needs help, you have to help them and everything. And then – then in life I learned something else too, that you have to keep your ground, and not let your people, you know step over you. Because some people, they [indecipherable] softness.
Q: That’s right.
A: And – and they try to take advantage of you, but – a-and that was life. But they ni – I was never told you know, something like this. There used to be a crazy man that used to come to our house and he was eating in the kitchen and everything, and my father sat and talked always with him. Eventually, during the war he attacked a local [indecipherable] killed him. He – he was crazy, but my father used to spend time even with him when he came, wanted to talk. Well, talk to the person, you know.
Q: Yeah. So, did your mother, when the revolution happened, this is, you know, several years before your birth, was she already married, was she already living there –
A: They got married – I don’t know on what day they got married exactly, but they got married, and they lived still in Rudakow(ph). And in Rudakow(ph) there was German army stationed over there. This was through first World War. And what happened was that eventually the German army went communistic, and the other side was communistic, and they all dropped their rifles and they said, why are we fighting? And the Germans dress my mother and my father as German soldiers and put them on the train to evacuate that, because they started killing all the [indecipherable] over there already, and especially the bourgeois, you know. So the Germans evacuated them, and my father said that the Russians were shooting at that German in train, and the machinists run away. And my grandfather was building Trans-Siberian railroad in Russia, and my father traveled the loco – locomotive, so my father went and he was running the train to Poland because they had nobody to run the train, they didn’t know how to operate it. And my father said he was lucky that when he came to the Polish border – already Poland had a border, they stopped them. And they didn’t like people coming from the east, but my father ask, who is the commanding officer there? And he – my father knew him when he said, tell him that it’s me. So they let them go into Poland, because they could have turned them in, and there was big trouble, you know, people moving there and back.
Q: So your mother’s estate and where she married your father was in what’s today Belarus? It was a –
A: It – it – it was Belarus - Minsk, you know, there.
Q: Yeah.
A: But you didn’t tell my mother, you see, we could have come to America, clearly, because she was born in Russia. But Americans would have given her a Russian visa right away to come to America, because there was no quota number from Russia, but my mother wouldn’t let be put that she was born in Russia, because may be a Russian. So she refused to do it, and she said that she was born in Rudakow(ph), Poland. I can show her passport to you –
Q: Yeah.
A: – even, I have her passport. Because we resented – you see, we considered Russia inhuman land, because it’s – the minute you cross – I am not talking about the Russian people, but the land is inhuman. When you go in there and you see, when you cross Ural mountains, you go for days and days, every now and then you see some sediment, they – where did they put coal, or something. And there’s nothing but rivers, forests, everything’s empty. People were all walking with mosquito nets on their face, million of mosquitos. Where they deported us there was a forest, we were asking Russians, how far does the forest go? Nobody knew. They just didn’t know what it was, and they didn’t know much about the world. In that village a lot of people never saw a plane. Some of them used to go to – to deliver, you know, by truck something, so they knew – they saw trains, but the children didn’t see trains.
Q: So this is – you’re talking about deep into the heart of Siberia.
A: Si-Siberia, yeah.
Q: And we’ll get to that part of your story when – when you end up there with your family. I want to establish now, get – get a sense a little bit of your early life, and of the family that you were born into, both on the mother’s side and on your father’s side.
A: No, because wh-when my father and my grandfather was dead already, because he was building Trans-Siberian railroad, and he had ulcers operation in Moscow, and he went for recovery to Yalta, and he’s buried in Yalta actually, he died over there. And –
Q: Mm-hm. That would have been what year?
A: I could not tell you.
Q: 1890s though, or –
A: It’s something – 18 something you know. My father was young still, it was before he met my mother, so he was young man. And m-m – well, with my mo – family, my grandfather was – everything [indecipherable] he was a banker, he was a shipbuilder, he was organizator(ph) of Polish zi-ziemianin. Ziemianin means people who possess land, you know –
Q: Okay.
A: – because –
Q: Landowners.
A: Landowner. Because you have to realize that in Poland, people look down on being a trader, on being something at your business like this. They like to have ownership and they were [indecipherable] you know, this was the part of people, they took part in the wars. The peasants didn’t have to fight, but the Polish peasants were not slaves, but they didn’t have to fight. And that’s why so many Jews, cause [indecipherable] he had the girlfriend Jewish, and they brought a lot of Jewish people, and they open up Poland to the Jews, because they needed people in business and in everything, and a lot of Jewish people came to Poland. Actually, a mason showed me in America papers the Jews used to, 1600, how to come to Poland. It was shown that there was nothing, no towns or nothing. And a lot of Jews were immigrating to Poland, but –
Q: You’re talking several hundred years ago.
A: Oh yeah.
Q: Yeah.
A: And they were coming in, you know, K-Kazimierz Wielki. He had the stairka(ph).
Q: Casti – so you’re talking about Casimir the Great? Casimir(ph) the – yeah.
A: Yeah, yeah, this is long ago, you know.
Q: Yeah.
A: And you see, I studied very little Polish history, I know, but the Jewish people were welcome in Poland because you know, some people say, well, you persecuted us. I said, why did you come? Nobody ask you. You were invited to come, but surely, to open the trade. And – and that was it. Very often we were told by Jewish people even in Wilno, you own the street, we own the houses, you know, so that was the – all the businesses, if you went to stores or something, like we used to go and buy clothes, and everything was in – most in Jewish stores, you know. Later on they started making cooperatives in Poland, so – like we had to sell a cow or a horse or a grain; everything will being always sold to Jewish people. But generally before the war, they started making trading organization, and you know, the – and that was different. But the – but the thing was, you know, who knows? By now everybody’s so mixed up over there, nobody knows who’s who. Like you knew history.
Q: Right.
A: My – my – I think it was my grandfather’s father, he was punished by the tsar for rebelling against the tsar. So he was sent for 12 years of katorga(ph). Katorga(ph), I don’t know what – you know what katorga(ph) is?
Q: Yeah, go – it’s – it’s [indecipherable]
A: He was chained to a wheelbarrow for 12 years in a mine. And when they release him, he was sent – he wasn’t allowed to return to Poland, so he went to Kaupas(ph). And my father told me that he married a – this miserable harrick(ph), wh-who was a Tartar or something like this, you know, from there. [indecipherable] supposedly, who’s princess or something, because he had money you know, when he was released already. And then he came back to Poland, and they – I had very dark complexion. My father said that this is he – that he is dark complexion, I, my sister, from that – from her. And they called me in Poland, Togo(ph), my grandfather called me Togo(ph) because he knew a Japanese admiral, and it was Tojo(ph). And he said because I had slanted eyes. And my experience in life was, when I was in American army, they send me to Tokyo first. And when I was in Tokyo I went to Japanese stores, and the Japanese right away puts chairs for me in the store, brings the tea or something to drink. I said, why do you do it? Because you’re no gook, you’re not a foreigner. I said, why? Your eyes.
Q: Oh my.
A: And the Japanese saw it right away, they have – you slanted eyes, and they treated me very differently from Americans. And when I told them that I’m Polish, well, they loved Polish people because Polish people hated the Russians. And this was after the Korean war, and you know, when Russians marched and took kore – up north, Japan, well they never released it, and they said that was the reason the Japanese surrendered so fast in second World War. It wasn’t only atomic weapons, but the Russians invaded already, Japan. And they were petrified that Russia will take all of Japan. And Japanese from first World War, they hate them.
Q: My goodness. All of –
A: I [indecipherable] too much.
Q: No, no, but it’s – it’s – it’s so many threads, and they’re very interesting, all of them. But let’s go back to your father, and I want to just establish one thing; when you speak of the grandfather you knew, it’s your mother’s father, is that correct?
A: Mother’s father.
Q: Your – your – your grandfather whom you did not know was your father’s father.
A: I only had a picture of him, but I don’t know him, I didn’t know him.
Q: Yeah.
A: He died when my father was young, you know.
Q: So tell me – tell me about the Kiersnowski family, about your father’s side, and were they as – as wealthy as your mother’s side, or how –
A: Well, Kiersnowski, he – he – I’ll tell the story of Kiersnowski family was, there were a lot of [indecipherable] they were exceptionally wealthy, you know, for that family. And they used to send, if somebody was in trouble, to Oxford Un-Un-Universities and everything. They were known, but they were all educated, and they were engineers, lawyers, everything, and they had lands, too, property land. In Druskieniki, my father’s family had villas, quite a number of villas over there. And they sold it, and for – for marks, and the marks collapse. He didn’t sell it, he was mad at his – how brothers and sisters, that they sold it without his knowledge, my father said. He never wanted to go and see, even.
Q: Yeah.
A: Now, you know, same with us, we were in Wilno and we went, and I saw our barn only. And I told the fellow turn around, I don’t want to see that. It brings too much memory. I could go and see my house. My Francesca was there, we were in – and the fellow says, well, it’s a big barn. I says yeah, it’s a very big barn. And I always remember that barn, there was a big storm before the war, and the wind tore the whole roof off, and we had to pay a lot of money to rebuild the roof on it, and the Polish government put a new tax on us for the new roof, instead of giving us a tax reduction.
Q: Yeah, insult to injury.
A: In-Insult to injury.
Q: So –
A: So – so my father couldn’t go to schools. I told you, my father had wilchi(ph) bilet. He was in school and he cut out the border of Russia – of Poland from Russia during the geography lesson. And that was the end of his education, they wouldn’t let him go, obviously. So he didn’t go. But if you talk –
Q: Excuse me, excuse me. They didn’t let him g – means – was he thrown out of school?
A: Yeah.
Q: Yeah?
A: They call it wilchi(ph) bilet, a wolf’s ticket they used to give, and that was the end of your education in Russia, so you had to go somewhere overseas to study, you know? A-And – or – or something, but – but not in Russia. But from – but my father traveled a lot about Russia, his father was building a siber – in this Trans-Siberian railroad, my fo – his g – my grandfather took him to f – to hunt for polar bear in Russia. And – and they went up north, and his father said to him [indecipherable] you shoot, and you fall down. And – and the polar bear was coming at them. And then he shot, but my father says, of course I missed, I hit him in the paw. And his father shot him in between the eyes, and my father said that was my end of hunting, because the bear sat down and with the other paw grabbed snow and applied it to his forehead. And my father said, I would never hunt again in my life.
Q: Oh my goodness.
A: Mm-hm.
Q: Oh my goodness.
A: He says it’s awful because it was just like a human being, you know? And my father said, I will never hunt again. So he had very good time. He was known as [indecipherable] that he was everywhere, you know, my father. He was going to operas, he was going everywhere, and somewhere he met my mother. And my father was a beautiful voice, because this other [indecipherable] Kiersnowski who was in London, his father was singing in La Scala opera, and my father, they wanted him to come to America, actually. He had this, how do you call it, complete hearing, you know, very few people have it. He could go with Polish actors and they would be in two different rooms, and they would go nobody knows and they said, who’s singing in this room? They couldn’t tell them apart, my father could imitate so perfectly, voices of other people. He could hear a tune, he would sit down and play it on the piano.
Q: Well, what you’re describing is somebody who, if I put it bluntly, didn’t need to earn a living. He had –
A: No.
Q: – he had – okay.
A: No, no.
Q: So that by the time you were born, was he – was he earning a living in some way?
A: Well, we were –
Q: Or was he do –
A: He – he work for a while. He work – my father, for a while worked in northeast [indecipherable] out there, what was the name of the place? [indecipherable] This was on the border of Russia, and they were trying to help the little farmers in villages. They used to have very, very long fields. So they were trying to make them square, you know, for them. And my mother said it was so much trouble because they were coming with the bags of gold, giving a bag of gold to give in this piece, not that piece and everything. And my mother said, I am not going to take any gold from you. He had to evaluate what the land was. You know, he knew the land. So it approximately the same field and everything, but instead of him plowing two kilometers field, he would be plowing just few hundred yards, you know. So he was doing –
Q: So was this a certain kind of Polish refor – land reform?
A: Yeah, Polish land reform.
Q: Because this – land reform.
A: And he work with that. And we rented our property out and it became a disaster, so we came back there and my father came back and we had that farm, you know.
Q: So tell me about that farm. Tell me about where you were born, the house you grew up in. What was the – what was the area like and so on.
A: Oh, beautiful. There were forests around. There were deers and there were hare everywhere. Not rabbits, you know, but big hares [indecipherable]. Oh, and there were a lot of woods, our place was called Wochunay(ph).
Q: Wochunay(ph)?
A: The wilki, it was, there were a lot of wolves over there. I remember one time I was coming back from Wilno and I was walking and it was late in the evening and I saw the – a wolves eyes in the forest, and I got so scared I started screaming and whistling loud. And we had [indecipherable] ducks at home [indecipherable] how, how, and all our ducks started running and the wolves ran away.
Q: Wow.
A: But it was – it was – it was a beautiful life. You see, I was born with a heart. When I went to school in Poland, they put us in front of the machine when we were small, and they looked at our lungs. A-And they saw my heart that I was in the wrong position, so I was not allowed to ride on the bicycle, I was not allowed to take exercises. They said they – by 21 my heart will come to normal position, that it happens in children. We had a very good doctor, Salzman(ph). He was taking care of Pilsudski, Marshall Pilsudski too, you know.
Q: Oh wow.
A: Well, we had connections everywhere. So he was taking – my mother wanted me to go to cadet school, they said, they’ll never accept you with this heart problem, because I should never be in the army, they said, with that problem. So, but I could ski, and I loved to ski up, and behind the horses in the winter, you know?
Q: Cross country skiing.
A: And cross country ski. We had the hills in fer – in back of our property. I made the jumping thing and I used to jump. But I was very small. I told you, I didn’t grow til I was fif – 16 - 17, and they call me [indecipherable] always in that I will never grow. My grandfather was petrified. My father used to say, don’t worry, I was the same way. I was so small and I was dark, and in school there was war in Abyssinia.
Q: Mm-hm.
A: You know?
Q: That’s right.
A: And [indecipherable] was there, and they carried me on the chairs in school and they made me necklace that I am, you know, the king and everything. And they pinch me while they carry me on the chair in schools. And my mother finally took me and put me in a private school. But over there they told me that you never get tuberculosis, because you have very, extremely large lungs, you know, in that school. And – but I – I – I couldn’t do a lot of things that other children were doing. They didn’t let me, you know, I stunk exercises.
Q: So you first – you were first in school in a public school and then –
A: Public school.
Q: – and then changed to a private school.
A: Well, my – I had appendicitis operation, and I was put on the stage in school during the prayer and they told nobody to push me or anything. And my mother was coming to school, and there was a bunch of guys pulling me on the stairs by the legs. That did it, my mother took me out the school. And you see, I was from a farm, as my uncle, and I wasn’t living in Wilno. So the people from Wilno, the kids, they didn’t like me, tha – because I was from the country, you see? People are very clannish, immediately clannish. So they didn’t like me. And I remember one time, one guy was giving me so much trouble. And you know those furnaces to heat the house with –
Q: Right.
A: – hermetic things they were big iron things that you tied, and –
Q: Right.
A: – and he started to – accusing me, and I grabbed him by the neck and I started hitting his head into that iron. Thank God there was some guy and they stopped me, I could have killed the guy. I was pretty strong you know about things –
Q: About how old were you when that happened?
A: Ten.
Q: And this was in public school?
A: In public school, and that’s my mother transferred me to [indecipherable] to public – to private school, and there were only 13 of us, and all 13 of us survived the war. Now only one lives in Warsaw and I am in America. We talk every week with him, I talk with him.
Q: Oh my gosh.
A: The other – the other 11 died already. One boy died last year.
Q: From that private school. But I want to stay with the public school. In that public school, were there any Jewish kids?
A: Of course.
Q: Okay, and –
A: But Jewish kids were mostly in Jewish schools. Wilno had Jewish schools, Jewish universities, Jewish everything. It was a big cultural center of Judaism. You know, in Poland there were what, three and a half million Jews, supposedly. That was 10 percent of Polish population. So it was a great – what – what remain of Judaism. A lot of it was saved be – by being in Poland. The only thing, the Jews didn’t understand what pogrom was. Pogrom was when the Cossacks from Ukraine were beating, but they were beating everybody. They were beating Jews, they were beating us. There were – supposedly the tsar of Russia used Jews as tax collectors, so Russians wouldn’t like the Jews for being tax collectors. You know, there’s such a messy, this world always, the more you look at it, the worse it gets. That’s my opinion from my experience.
Q: Well, when you were a kid going to school, did all those – did those things play out in the classroom, or play out outside of the classroom?
A: Oh, we played outside. We were – no, but we had gymnastics in Poland. Oh, there were lines to climb, you know, there were a thing, you jump over the horses –
Q: Oh no, but what I me – what I meant by play out, I meant, did these issues of clannishes – clannishness and you know, kids being either from wealthy parents or from poor parents, or Jewish kids, or –
A: No, it wasn’t – it wasn’t that, it was – no, it wasn’t that. It was what region you come from.
Q: Okay.
A: You see, when they played, you know, in Wilno you saw there are courtyards.
Q: Yes, right.
A: So if a child from this courtyard were to come to play on this courtyard, they told him, go and play in your own courtyard, leave our courtyard alone. People are so clannish that –
Q: So it’s territorial.
A: Territorial almost, you know, and that exists everywhere that you go, and is between the nations. Now that I’m old, I realize it. I remember that when all – later on from India, I was sent to Africa, to Uganda, to a camp – Polish refugee camp. And the boys who are there, from India that came, and they said to me, you know, we can’t even go to a dance. This – Ugandan [indecipherable] won’t accept us, they call us. They call us Indians, and they don’t want us. They were there maybe four or five years in that camp, and we just came over. And I remember I came over and I met a very [indecipherable] girl, you know, and I went over there, and some of the guys from India went over there, and I learned to fight pretty well in India. And I asked them, who is the leader of those boys? And they told me, well I dance, and I hit him so hard dancing polka, that he fell down. I stood over him, I said, do you want more, or no? And he said no. And our boys got up and they could already dance and play. But this is the clannishness of people. They were considering themselves African and we were Indians already to them.
Q: And you’re already Pole – and your always – you were all Poles.
A: And we were all Poles or from Russia. But you see, this is clannishness, this is unbelievable in people. I notice it everywhere. Everywhere I notice it, clannish. Look at when I was drafted into American army. There were five Jewish guys, and there were three Ukrainians, and we all stuck together, we were – we were the best of friends, all the time, because we were from Poland and from Ukraine, so we’re from that region, and in American army. We felt that we have to protect ourselves from those dumb Americans, who choose to step on our feet, you know. It’s right away, and it was, you know – I told you about this Jewish fellow, Jakubovic(ph) [indecipherable]. He was in the American army, and he was in the barrack. He spent the whole war in a concentration camp in Germany. And he used to wake up at night and scream. I went to Americans, explaining, please do something for this guy. He spent – well, Americans didn’t understand what it’s all about. Finally, I got to the rabbi. In the army there are various religions, you know –
Q: Right.
A: – people, and I got to a rabbi, went to a rabbi, and I told him, I said, this is criminal what they’re doing to these guys. He wakes up and he thinks, in the middle of the night that he’s in German concentration camp. And they moved him right away, the rabbi put him in a separate room, and no more training, military training, he was taken care of the hot water for us. And bu-but – we – we – but people just don’t understand, people don’t understand other people in this world. Very often a lot of misunderstandings are befall that.
Q: Well –
A: And there are – and then there are a lot of very bad people. I wish they would get rid of them early, when they start only. But how do you know that they are going to be bad [indecipherable]
Q: That’s true, you don’t know. You don’t know.
A: This is [indecipherable] Jesus Christ parables, you read about it, that there is a good tree and a bad tree. And a good tree will give good fruits, and a bad tree will give you nothing. And the same thing with people. You get some people that will be mean, and hurt a lot of people and everything, and there are people who will help you.
Q: Let’s go back to Wilno. I want you to paint a picture for me, of what did this city in northeast Poland look like? What kind of a city, how would you describe it?
A: What?
Q: Wilno. How – how would you describe it? The city
A: Well, Wilno was a Lithuanian city.
Q: Okay.
