Key: TB - Tibor Baranski [interviewee] JF - Josey Fisher [interviewer]
Interview Date: Tape 1, side 1:
JF: Mr. Baranski, can you tell us where and when you were born and a little bit about your background?
TB: In the 1880's a Polish gentleman, after the third dismemberment of Poland, when Poland disappeared from the map of Europe and the southern part of Poland was close to the Austro-Hungarian Empire, was ordered to spend his soldier time in Budapest. This gentleman was my grandfather, Albert Baranski. He fell in love with the Hungarian city and after his three years of soldier duty he married in Budapest; Rudolph (or in Hungarian, Reszl) Baranski, my father, was born there. And since Austria-Hungary was together for 400 years, it was quite natural that he fell in love with a lady who was born in Wiener Neustadt, a suburb of Vienna, Maria Schelnader, and this lady became my mother. These two persons were unfortunately were too short people in love because later in life my parents got divorced, and this I do not want to comment on this day. I was born on June 11, 1922, in Budapest, and according to superstitious people, on a very lucky time, Sunday morning, seven o’clock. I was raised in very, very deep and affectionate love, sometimes maybe a little bit soft love, but God was gracious enough to give me a lot of illnesses which well balanced so, thanks God I did not become a tempered brat. The greatest influence on my life was done first by my grandfather who was a highly educated person, a very multi-talented person. [unclear] who was absolutely superb in mathematics and engineering. He was in the calculating office of the First Hungarian Aeronautics Office, only a little nucleus in the end of the 1910's and beginning of 1920's, but except sports, this gentlemen knew almost every field. He was not excellent, but a fairly good painter. He had a fantastic voice; he liked to sing. He knew literature, and since he mastered better German than Hungarian, he was a co-worker of the Pester Lloyds, newspaper in Budapest of German language. The funny thing was that, although he worked with this paper, his pen name, which would have been just unnecessary because Schelnader was a very good German name, as a pen name he used a Hungarian name in the German paper, calling himself Aush. So if somebody is looking in the end of 1910 and the 1920's in Pester Lloyd, you would find very likely several articles of my grandfather's. Unfortunately, I have never time to dig out them. It would be interesting. This gentleman had an enormous influence of me. He could teach me of things. I give you good example. When I saw as a four-years-old child a street car, I could explain it: how the copper and the iron ore was mined, melted, made a railroad of it, installed in the street, how the wood was cut out, mastered in factories, made the seating, the seat in the street car, and he could tell me all these like a fairy tale, so, except reading and writing, when I was five years old I had the intellectual education of ten-years-old child due to the influence of my grandfather.
JF: What was the religious influence on you?
TB: The religious influence was in another way that he did, because my grandmother was very much of a churchgoer. As a child who was very sensitive to colds and flus, I was many, many time in danger that I will die. I will tell you later that between fourteen and nineteen, I had every year, one new pneumonia. And the first two pneumonias were so serious that I really almost died. So I can remember that when I was as a little boy, two, three, four years old, in my bed, and my chest was full of flu, and I was hardly able to take breaths, and my grandma was sitting all night praying rosary and asking God to help this little lousy boy to stay alive, and we went to a Holy Mary Shrine, called Maria Remeda in Budapest, and I was very often there with my grandmother, so from my early childhood on, I had a very serious devotion to Holy Mary, and now, as a Hungarian poet and writer, I have chosen myself a pen name. I created it from Holy Mary's name in Hungarian: Mary is Maria and I created for myself a pen name, Mariashi for the devotion to the Mother of Christ. But I remember from childhood on, my grandmother was very, very much religious, and she tried to educate me this way. I know we went every Sunday to church, and when we have just now in October, we had the Holy Mary devotions every evening in Europe in May and in October, and I was raised in this way. I can say that I was so much in spite of my outgoing nature, I was in the same time, people say that I am a little bit schizophrenia, because I was born in Gemini, and they are usually double people. I am very much meditative. I know from circumstances that usually every morning when my grandmother came to wake me up around eight o’clock, I exposed to her my meditations, but when I was waiting for her, and one morning I surprised her and I said, “Grandma, I know that you are an old lady, and there are much older ladies than you, and there are younger ladies than you, and there is my mother who is younger, and I am very little, how was that? When did I start to become?” And this meditation: how old I am and what is about life, they came up when I was three years old, so I know I was very much introvert, very much thinking. Another morning I surprised my grandma similarly about this, when I went in the other direction. I said, “Okay, grandma, you told me now that I was once born, but I cannot understand how I was born, and then I am now a little boy, and then I see bigger boys and bigger girls, and you are old and very old, could you tell me now how old is God?”
JF: Hmm.
TB: So this was another morning. I was fairly meditative and introvert in spite of my outgoing nature. On the other hand, when we went to the park, they could not hold me back to run to another child and kiss the child, because I wanted to love other people.
JF: Were you schooled in Catholic Schools or were you in the public system?
TB: Since we were a middle-class people, undoubtedly, let me spend for this only a very little time. The Baranskis in Poland are seven hundred year registered old noble Polish family of different branches. Some of my family came over to Hungary from Poland, not by reasons as I mentioned you about the part of Poland was annexed to Austria Hungary, but at this time it was not. They came over from themselves, and that remains still big shots, but later on Austria Hungary was devoured a part of Poland, and those Polish people became very desperate and tried to make a conspiracy against Austrian emperor, and they were caught, and according to good practical methods, some of them were executed and private property confiscated, so the branch of my family became very poor. Never mind about our noble background and rich background. Naturally, the rich part of the Baranski family didn't want to have any connection with the rebels for two reasons, because they were rebels, and they became poor. Maybe the poor people would ask the rich ones for some money, so we became, I wouldn't say beggars, but in a fairly modest middle class financial situation; consequently we had no way to send our children for a while to private school, because it cost money. I was only lucky enough, in spite of I went to the government schools or public schools how you call them, whatever phrase you like, still in the old-fashioned Hungary, our level was fairly good and fairly strict. I give you, probably interesting for you to know as Americans that the so-called Hungarian Gymnasium is not a sport place; it is a high school because gymnastic means training, and this was the place of an intellectual training. Our Gymnasium system had an eight-year system. You started when you were ten, and the classes were, what you call here Grade 5, that was Form l, and Grade 6 is Form 2. So from Form 1 to Form 8 which equals Form 8 to Grade 12. But our pattern of studies was enormously strong. You learned eight years Hungarian language and literature from Form 1 to 8, from age 10 to 18. You learned eight years Latin. When you became 12 years old, you started to go to Form 3, would be here Grade 7, you had to start, Grade 5, sorry, Grade 7, okay, you studied for six year German. Then again you became 14 years old, you had an elective obligatory language. You had the right to chose, but you could not drop it. I had chosen English, so I studied four year English. Let me repeat: 8 year Hungarian and Latin, six year German, four year English. In my case for a certain reason, I studied 8 year German and 6 year Latin, never mind, so at least what I want to bring out now in this little conversation: that you should know that our high school education even in public school was very strong.
JF: What was your social experiences in high school in terms of other children from different backgrounds, for instance, the Jewish children?
TB: Even you see, Mrs. Fisher, here I have to go back again. My first experience with the Jews is this: that either one of the best, or verbally the best, friend of my grandmother was a sweet old Jewish woman, Mrs. Schwartz, and so I was educated together with Mrs. Schwartz who liked me very, very much. The funny thing, Schwartz means in English ‘black’, and later on her daughter was married to another Jew whose name was Mr. Fecatur. But the Hungarian word, fekete means ‘black’ in English, so Miss Schwartz was married by Mr. Fekete, both names mean ‘black’. And later on I married this lady, I met this lady many, many times, this old lady because she, I moved to another district, and by fun, she moved again to the same district, so I saw her last when I was around 17 or 18 years old; she lived about two blocks from me, and she still loved me affectionately, because she knew me from her son, that was the first contact.
JF: Did you spend time in her home with the family?
TB: In my grandmother's time, she was rather with us. Later on, when I lived in BudaNorth called Obuda, then I was more often in her home than she was in my home because her son-in-law was the co-owner of a famous factory, there were two Jews who ran the factory: Mr. Goodman and Mr. Fekete, and if you see on old Hungarian products “GFB”, that means the factory of Goodman and Fekete in Budapest. And this was a famous factory, only two or three blocks from my home, and at the time I said, I would go over to Mrs. Schwartz and have fine good cappuccino, a coffee, and good homemade cake, and so it was up to about 1939, 1940.
JF: Did you have classmates, friends of your own age also who were Jewish?
TB: Oh, yes, and we were in fairly good relation. One of the shocking deeds what you will hear from me later, a little boy, Kolinski Josha, we Hungarians always say first the family name, Joe Kolinski, who was a little tiny Jewish boy, awfully diligent, very nice; his parents were umbrella makers, and you will hear later, when I will be in my appointment as executive secretary of the Holy See in Hungary and I will meet his parents, without a son, being on the way to get deported and I could not help them. And they will ask me. “Please, Reverend, we are not Catholics, we are not so-and-so, but we have a son. He was removed from us a couple weeks ago. We don't know, if you have any contact can you help us?” and they open a university lecture, a little booklet, and I see the photograph of my own classmate. And I can still see almost in tears. I never saw Joe, and I could never help him, and he was sitting three desks before me. He was so small he was sitting in the first desk. I don't know what happened to him. Of this I don't even like to talk because I get a little bit too soft. This is a very heavy memory; he was a sweet, nice little guy. Yes I had a few Jewish classmates and like anybody else, some of them were closer to me, some of them, normal human nature, but my entire attitude from my home, was just natural to them; maybe later on when Mrs. Fisher will ask me about that: I will comment what about this global dark shadow that the Hungarians are the antisemites, so and so. Usually I don't like too much global thing because they are always twisting. Later on, I will comment, on this...
JF: What about when you were in school, did you have a sense of that feeling, did you have a sense of tension, in your classroom, in your growing-up period, between Jews and the Christians?
TB: In the elementary school absolutely nothing, which I spent in a suburb of Budapest called New Pest [Ujpest in Hungarian]. There was absolutely nothing, and there was, I think so, either nothing, or I didn't observe, in one of the high schools, because the first six forms I finished in the so-called Arbok Gymnasium in Buda, I would say in Old Buda. I observed some of the tension of this in my last two years of high school when I changed school, and I moved to the most condensed Jewish district of Budapest. You probably know that from Budapest, which was in this time approximately one million two hundred thousand people population, from this one million two hundred thousand, I would say over two hundred thousand were Jews. And this district where I went to high school called Modash Gymnasium or Borchai Street Gymnasium. Even you American Jews will sometimes hear about it because it was a fairly famous place, and some capable people came from there. This was already1938, when the pressure of the German Nazis became bigger and bigger in Hungary. By joke, our Gymnasium was called the “Second Jewish” because there was a, there was a Catholic Gymnasiums in Budapest, there was Jewish Gymnasiums, established by Jews. Our Gymnasium was called the “Second Greatest Jewish Gymnasium”, because, true, that in my class, the class size in Europe was between 40 and 50 which is for America an enormous high number, but this was over there natural. So in my class you had about 44 or 45 people. In a Catholic-dominated country, in my class we were 12 Catholics but 22 or 23 Jews. Now since the Nazi pressure started to become bigger and bigger, you could sometimes feel that there is some uneasy thing, and my impression is one of my classmates later became involved with the German Volksbund in Hungary. He was originally a very nice guy, and we became with this man almost friends, and sometimes I saw that he didn’t want too much friendship with me, and I didn’t understand. And when I finished high school in 1940 and for totally different reason that I don’t want to explain, would not belong to this tape, I went to the so-called German Volksbund Haus, still I have to say, because you would be interested what was Baranski doing in the German Volksbung Haus. Between when I finished my high school, I wanted to become a lawyer, and since I was financially not strong enough, for one year, I wanted to go to an office to work and get a little money, and after that start the University. So I went to an insurance company, not as a salesman, as a worker, as an office worker, and this insurance company sent me for official reason to the German house because the Hungarian Volksbund leader was our client, Mr. Bosch and I entered this house going to him for official reason: he had a car insurance with our company, and whom do I see in one room than my former classmate, and then I understood that since this man became a traitor and wanted to collaborate with Nazis, although I approached him with friendship, he was afraid to admit my friendship because he knew that I will not approve it. So this man became awfully pale when he saw me that I see him as a little Gauleiter in this Volkshaus. But otherwise except this man, if I would say you, “Was that in our class, really attention?” If there was up to a certain, what I am almost sure there was, but this was absolutely not natural. This was a created sense, so somebody did something in underground, not by nature. They wouldn’t say, “Hey you damn stinking Jews.” Such a thing, thanks God, even in spite of the Nazi pressure was not in our class, definitely not.
JF: Did you feel anything from the teachers, anything from the administration during those early years?
TB: No. No. in the Arbad Gymnasium in Buda, absolutely nothing, that is out of question, absolutely nothing. In the so called Modash Gymnasium or Borchai Street Gymnasium from the staff, never anything because our staff was still, this was a high school and our staff was still well-balanced. I tell you this was a very quality government school. Most of the teachers from this school were named later principals to other schools, so this school was a, in government scale, one of our three or four best high schools in Hungary.
JF: Among the class itself, there were personal friendship going back and forth to the…
TB: Yes, yes, yes.
JF: How was it?
TB: The mother, I tell you how that is. There was just a few days ago, I met one of my former classmates who lives now in Canada. I didn’t see the gentleman since 46 years. I got my high school diploma in 1940, and with him we talked about our former classmates. One of our most outstanding boy was my very good friend, a Jewish boy called Andrew Boshes as you say in English, Andy; we called him Bundy. Boshes Bundy was an absolutely of superb quality both intellectually and morally. We had the Hungarian literary club, he was the star over there. I was only the executive secretary of the club, so I was not too bad, but I considered this man at least, with all my non-humble nature, he was at least 30-35% better that I was, no doubt, because very excellent both in quality and in morals. He was, as a high school student, he was able to give us three lectures without reading. He was so much full of knowledge, and he had this eloquence. He was an absolutely of superb quality.
JF: So you were in the Gymnasium during the period of Hitler’s rise in Germany and during the beginning of the spread of Nazism. What was the discussion among the students between you and your friends? What did you know, what did you speculate?
TB: Look, number one, if you are involved deeply in studies, I can say, except the last two years, just when I went over this other high school, when you are already after 16, then you really started in the old-fashioned word to become a semi-adult and started to talk about political things, but this I can tell you very honestly, I didn’t find a single person, maybe this boy whom I mentioned you before, he became a Nazi, he didn’t dare to express his opinion, I didn’t find a single person among the Christians as I told you, were about twelve Catholics and I think so, seven or how many Presbyterians [we called them, in Hungary, Calvinists] and all the rest were Jews, but I don’t think any of us would have approved what Hitler did. And I already mentioned here, I will go over it deep in my later statements, if anybody has ever in America the temptation to say either by ignorance or by bad influence, that Miklos Horthy, our old regent, was a Nazi, then I have to say it’s a very poor thing if we get ever the question what I get, what I got as a history teacher in the United States, that, in Canada even more, I taught once in Canada, and I got the question which was full of wind, and I have to put it here now because by nature, you know, the relaxed conversation, it just comes up now. “Tell, Mr. Baranski,” I was addressed in Canada, “Was Miklos Horthy a Nazi?” And I became nasty, and I said, I saw that the boy was not a heckler, it was, he heard about it, so I gave a mild sarcasm, I said to him, “Of course, did you not know that the English King was a Communist?” And the boy in Canada got out, “But, Mr. Baranski!” I said, “Stop for a moment; did you not see that the reason why you ask it because Hungary became an ally to Germany, so naturally Miklos Horthy had to be a Nazi?" I told him, "This is why I say, my dear son, since England became an ally to Russia, so very likely the English King had to be a Communist.” This was already in grade eleven or twelve, and the boy was very bright and he said to me, “Mr. Baranski, I give you now a very clear distinction. England was never a real political ally to Russia. England was a war ally to Russia.” I said, "Son, God bless you, for this clear distinction. Hungary, even if Hungary sometimes was political ally, Hungary never wanted to be. Hungary realized, because in 1919 we had the five year, the five months Communism in Hungary, the communism executed between 100 and 150,000 people in five months, so we knew what Communism is. In the meantime, Hungary was mutilated at the end of the First World War, and a thousand-years-old kingdom lost two-third of its former territories, so we had two motivations. Hitler promised us that if we helped him, he will be strong enough to keep the Communists away, and he will help us to get back our old territories.”
JF: Did you think that that would happen?
TB: Since we knew, number one, I want to lay down one thing. I'm not too bad in scholastics aside, languages, history, philosophy, and I was always very lousy on science, but one thing many of us suspected that since the Germans are so excellent in science, either militarily or in science or in both, they will be able to counterbalance the Russians, not because of the number, because of their superior scientific knowledge. So when Hitler promised the miraculous gun, most of us believed in it, because we knew that they were able to do absolutely unexpected things, and we said, “Why not?” Meanwhile, what is again interesting, I switch now to another topic, but you will be interesting to know, even the proud Germans said that, I give you almost verbally a statement from a German general, the guy said, the name now doesn't come to my mind, "If I would be able" said the German, "to have a German leadership and Hungarian soldiers, I would beat the entire world." Which means that the Germans believed that as soldiers, our soldiers are a better quality than the Germans.
JF: When did you first think that there was more to what Hitler was after than the scientific offering of the fight against Communism?
TB: Look, I was still in high school. I would say from approximately, in my last grade, in the 1939-1940 academic year, when I was between 17 and 18, and I started to have more and more interest to get into political things, to understand what is going on, then I saw that there is a pan-Germanistic attitude and Germany wants to be the absolute lord of Europe, I mean, the Germans, many of the Germans [unclear] did not agree with it, but you know, most of us have always a national pride. Napoleon made the French to believe that they are the only people, and this happens to us easily. If you want to notice, the character of China means in English translation “the middle of the world”. We all people have chauvinistic attitudes, so I was in my last year of high school when I realized that Germany wants to be the absolute lord, and then I realized, which bothered my national pride, that one of my very well-balanced Hungarian fatherly friends, 45 or 50-years-old gentleman, who was very educated, had shown me a copy of the first two or three editions of the Mein Kampf, Hitler's book, and there was a very bad statement which made me furious, and this was, and I give you the German sentence, and I saw this sentence in the book, when he wrote at that time in the beginning about the Hungarians, and he didn't know that once the Hungarians would become his ally, I quote now almost verbally, what I will say now is 90% he wrote the same things with the same heaviness of construction, when he wrote about Hungarians, quote: “Hinaus mit diesem Zigeunervolk von Europa!” “Out with these gypsy people from Europe!”
JF: And you knew about that?
TB: I saw it that text in the Mein Kampf, this gentleman had one of the first three editions.
JF: This was in what year?
TB: I saw that in, but when was the first edition I don't know.
JF: But when did you see it?
TB: I saw this in 1939-40 academic year. I was in my last year in high school. And this sentence made me furious. Naturally, when Hitler became our political ally, from the next edition of the Mein Kampf this statement was dropped. So if you buy now I don't know, from the 9th edition, I don't know, you will not find this sentence. You will not find this sentence. He was smart enough to drop this. Because, you see, and for a short while, we thought that maybe we can be in this way an ally, that this will not go over into ideological way. At least, I can say this with good conscience, until I was in high school, it was nothing if I compared with the American leftist education because you talked enough to the high school teacher who had taught for a number of years history, I can tell you in good conscience, up to 1940 in our high school was not the spirit in regard to Nazism but you see in the United States in regard to Communism. We several times talked so that Hitler was a dictator but Stalin was only a generalissimo. Why do we not say that Stalin was in the same way the Red Dictator that Hitler was the Brown Dictator?
JF: You’re questioning that now?
TB: Yes, of course.
JF: Not at that time.
TB: Such a thing was not in Hungary. We did not brainwash our kids until 1940, until I finished high school, where I was the first eye-witness. It was not told to us what a fine guy Hitler is. We said that it is very likely, what I heard that was the strongest statement, that it was very likely that Nazism would be strong enough to counter-balance the--detrimental influence.
Tape 1, side 2:
TB: So let me finish the sentence, that they thought that Nazism will be strong enough to counterbalance the detrimental influence of Communism, and, look, let me give you here another, see one question runs into another question, but if really want for the institution, I can give you later a little three, four-page brief resume of this to put it chronologically, or so to help you if you are confused maybe on the loopholes of this state. One thing is absolutely clear, that from the first moment on, Communism started: “I want world domination and atheistic world domination by any tool and any price.” This was no doubt. The other thing which was no doubt, since in Europe after the last First World War came a Communist wave; in Hungary it lasted five months, in other countries it lasted two or three months, Germany was so much down, so much demoralized from the last First World War, that the most respected German by everybody, English, Jew, everybody, Mr. Hindenburg, who was really of high moral standards. He wasn’t merely a soldier, but he was very decent, private life and everything, which means he did not run after woman, and in every respect he was a professional soldier, he was a reliable person, with a fairly broad horizon. He was fairly old in that time when people asked him, “Tell us sincerely, you can die any day. We are now in a very shaky position. If you will die, we can slip back easily into either [unclear] Communism or a very heavy Communist influence.” And I can quote for you, I know it from reliable Germans; I have fairly good connections. Hindenburg’s answer was the following: “ I don’t like this little suspicious corporal called Adolf Hitler, but I suggest you hold for him, I hope so we will be not worse that Communists.”
JF: How did you understand Hitler’s moves in Austria, Czechoslovakia, his invasion of Poland, this was all before you are talking, about the year 1939-40?
TB: No, this left me coming, this is interesting, it was almost no Hungarian, including the very low number of the Hungarian Nazis, to this point I come later, we all understood that this is German expansion. We did not misunderstand it. We all understood it right away that this is now German expansion, not only German expansion from Kaiser Wilhelm II, this is German expansion from [unclear] consistent.
JF: And how did you think it was going to affect you in Hungary?
TB: Some of us, if I would comment on the person, I would be a bubbler, I was too young to see a cross-cut in the country, but I do believe that the smartest of us said, “Until we have no doubt it is only a matter of time, in spite of we will not be politicians,” but we saw that, the priests saw it, that sooner or later it would be a face-to-face confrontation with Communism, and we thought, “Oh God, how good would be these two systems would demolish each other.”
JF: Before either of them got to Hungary.
TB: We knew that the Germans, now they come to Czechoslovakia, they devour half part of Poland. So when they made the agreement, one I always call it sarcastically when the Brown Communists made an agreement with the Red Nazis, we right away knew that soon these agreement will be not enough. We have a famous Hungarian proverb, I say it in Hungarian, I translate it in German [He translates it into English] “Two pipe players in one inn are too much, or two fiddlers in one inn are too much. The German idea was Drang Nach Osten. The Stalin ideas was Drang Nach Westen. The Germans wanted to expand toward east;, the Russian Communist imperialism wanted to expand towards west, so it was so obvious. We were really a little bit shocked and surprised. How the hell did these two become allies for a while, but some of the smarter said, “These allies should not last too long.” They did not because they needed space.
JF: You are talking now about the Hitler-Stalin Pact?
TB: Yes, and when they agreed with Ribbentrop that now they will devour half of Poland and half of Poland, but then this was the time when we saw that, in spite of it, because the Hungarians and the Polish or to the Polish are Slavic but we are not, but both countries are Catholic, and we were in the history only, if I am not mistaken, don’t trust me now, maybe I make a mistake, I think only twice enemies but all the time warm and close allies. When the persecuted Polish had problems, they escaped to Hungary; when we had problems, we escaped to Poland, so between us was really a very cordial relation. And we were deeply sorry that Poland suffered so much. Our only hope was that soon the two dictatorial systems would confront each other and hopefully they will either demolish each other or seriously weaken each other. This was the hope of many of us.
JF: Meaning that you hoped that everything would be resolved before it hit you own borders?
TB: Yes, we did. We were not so sure since Poland and Hungary are the corridors between East and West in this very drastic part of the world. We thought that yes, maybe the big storm, will be north from us. We were not sure that we became more and more suspicious of it because when we had to enter under Hitler’s side of the war because Hitler’s not only promise but a promise and a frightening. “You must enter on my side if you wanted I should help you politically to get back your old territories.” The so-called Russian bombing of the same Hungarian city where I studied theology, Kassa, was, we now know for sure that this was, a German provocation in a Russian airplane. I’m not a strategist, in this section don’t believe me now, it was either a Russian airplane, mastered in this time by a German pilot. The important thing was to make us to believe that the Russians were bombing a Hungarian city. So we should declare war against Russia. But behind this was Hitler with the promise and frightening, “You want to get back the rest of your territories; come and help us.”
JF: Did you have any understanding at that time of what else was involved in Hitler’s plan for Europe?
TB: What I said about eight, ten minutes ago, I really--shocked, and from this time on with full speed I was looking after as much time as I could devote, which is Hitler’s plan with us, because when I saw my own classmate sitting in the Volksbund Haus, then I started really to open my eyes and look what the Volksbund does. And I definitely know we had. Again let me stop here. The Turks were in Hungary for 150 years. They were driven out from Hungary in1686. The middle of Hungary became totally empty. The Austrian emperor, who was unfortunately Hungarian King for 400 years, very often a lousy king, sent an announcement all over Europe, “Come to Hungary. For ten years or fifteen years, it will be tax-exempt because the country is empty: start a new life!” This was the beginning and so many Germans came to our country because the country was empty. Naturally, it is not so easy that I come now to the German, to Hungary was an Italian, even an Italian settlement. Italians signed up to come to Hungary. But they came later, they became Hungarians after 300 years. But I want to tell you that to live in the neighborhood of Austria, you will not become a zealous Hungarian at all, but we were in fairly good relation until Hitler came, and some of those German guard in Hungary were bilingual; they spoke very good Hungarian and still German. They started to become hostile against us due to instigation what the Nazis did. But again I can see why I am so sorry for them because the Communists wanted to take revenge in the name of this, this I can say I in good conscience, maximum one-fifth of the German speaking ethnic group in Hungary became crazy Nazi, and all the rest did not. Yet the Communists took revenge on all those Germans, and this was absolutely not right, because before and I lived in a German district, all Buda Obuda North, was heavily full of Germans, and in the time of Hitler’s, when he was the star, they did not become crazy for him. They didn’t dare to contradict because they knew they could get in jail in ten minutes, just like under Communism. But secretly they tried to be as much anti-Nazi as possible, and later on, when I come in chronologically to the time, I will tell you about those German soldiers who came through Budapest, and spent three, four hours in my home, and were crying with me together, and they explained to me what Hitler did for their own country. Don’t think so that Germans are the Nazis, as never think that the Russians are the Communists. My sweet audience, you are totally wrong. In Russia obligatorily about seven per cent of the Russians are members of the Communist Party and not even those seven per cent are in the hard Communists. Can you imagine, I had a German priest in my home for one afternoon, who was drafted as a regular soldier, no priest distinction, nothing, he was as a matter of fact a monk, and his entire monastery was confiscated by Adolf Hitler. So I can tell you if somebody has experience, although I was not myself in Germany, but chronologically after my mother spoke first German, I could testify before God and man how many Germans there that damn Hitler, wish God knows where, but I tell you to have an opinion, my dear audience, and to have the guts to stand out and tell me honestly what would the guts mean: you are imprisoned; you are put in a working camp; you are exterminated; period. [unclear] Consistent, and the man who speaks to you suffered from both, does not tolerate any contradiction, period. And a nice Austrian doctor who had out once when Hitler had epileptic seizure, because his doctor was at this time was ill, or something, and this doctor told only to his friends about Hitler. “Aber er ist ja doch ein Narr” “This man is a crazy guy.” That was the only sentence. Two hours later, he disappeared and they never found him. And this again, I know absolutely sure because I know a person who was a good friend of the disappeared doctor.
JF: Who heard the doctor say this?
TB: Because they was sitting in a restaurant, the Austrians and the Germans like to drink beer, and it was, I don’t know what time, you don’t want me to say exactly, was it 8:30 in the evening, 10:15 in the evening, suddenly somebody came before the very excellent Austrian doctor, the Germans came, “Doctor, we have a medical problem. You must come right away.”
JF: This is about what year?
TB: When was Hitler in Austria? I don’t say now, when I am a public speaker, I was not prepared to have all the chronological chart before me, but it was in a time when Hitler was for a short while in Austria. He several times traveled here and there. And his doctor at this time, I don’t know, a short illness, only for a couple weeks or something or even less, but at this time he was not available. And Hitler, when he was young, was epileptic, and for a couple years by certain miraculously it stopped, so he had no seizures for awhile and the seizures returned.
JF: He had Grand Mal Epilepsy.
TB: And then, but for awhile, I don’t know why, he was out of seizures, and then again, they returned and went on.
JF: Was that the nature of his epilepsy, to your knowledge?
TB: One thing what I know, that sometimes he had seizures when he quarreled with people, and they dared to contradict him. And these, being emotion, helped to develop the new seizure. And then I don’t know whether he had a big quarrel with someone or not, but this Austrian doctor was called for medical reason. At first, he didn’t even say how. He was put in a car and carried to a building in which Hitler was, what building was I don’t know, and then he gave the proper medical help and came back, and the friends were still there, “Oh, what was so, and so and so,” and the joke, and the man who was a real, in German you say ein lustiger Kerl; he was a real joyful guy. He was sitting there in a very bad mood, and after I don’t know, being bothered half an hour or forty minutes or so, he said only to a couple of his friends, “This man is a crazy man,” and this little statement was enough that after two or three hours he disappeared and they never found him. So nobody knows, maybe he was killed in the same hour; maybe he was put somewhere, but the man, not under Nazi and not after the war, they never saw this doctor any longer.
JF: Did he describe the classical kind of epileptic seizure also in his comments?
TB: No, no, no. This doctor didn’t say to his friends anything. He was, no no.
JF: He did not talk about what he saw.
TB: I want only now to demonstrate for you; this was the reason for this little story. Do not think my dear, my American audience, that anybody there to contradict, and I can give you from my own life and experience in the United States when I was several times forced to perform a bad job in school, to be lax in discipline, to give little homework to get students along with lousy performance and good marks, and I refused it. And for this, I lost many of my jobs, and American guy doesn’t even contradict in the high school to the principal. So how do you expect here in America, that under dictatorial regimes, Brown dictatorship, Red dictatorship, would you dare to contradict? You were here so lousy when I was thrown out of school. All the staff were with me, were sorry for me, and not a single man dared to put in a word for me.
JF: You talked before in this line.
TB: Yes, I did.
JF: About Horthy and the fact that you feel he has been misjudged on many historic levels.
TB: Yes. Let me tell you something. Yes, for instance, this thing that I know very well, and I give you idea now, maybe you questioning it will come up again. I want to tell you that when I give you many informations what happened in Hungary between 1920 and 1940, between the two World Wars, because I was in the prison together with very prominent Hungarian leaders, namely, the chief secretary of Miklos Horthy who retired in 1936, ‘38, but still had very vivid contact with the other political leaders later on, too, even if he was not active during the wars.
JF: His name was?
TB: Yes, Vitez Laszlo Magashazi. He was my prison mate in the same cell from July 18, 1949 until March 11, 1950, so quite a number of months. He was sleeping on one of my side, and the other side was sleeping the chief guard of Miklós Horthy, similarly retired in ’38 or ’39, so similarly not involved in the Second World War, and his name was Gyula Marti Turek [phonetic]. In Hungarian we always say first the family name Marti Turek Gyula. So then I was together in the same cell with these generals or half-generals or almost-generals, I was together with one of our oldest Hungarian counts, Count Pál Esterhazy. So I had awfully highly, distinctive. He is still alive. He is still alive. He was my cellmate; we were together in the same cell.
JF: Was your knowledge of Horthy based on what you learned during the time you were in prison or did you have a sense of his thinking during the time it was actually happening?
TB: Yes, yes. For certain, as I mentioned at the beginning of this tape, that the direct line of my family was a humble middle-class family, but our father, he is very high leaders among the, one of the chief leader of Budapest, was Gyula [phonetic] Baranski, a lawyer, and so I had through my relatives fairly good connection in society, and due to my theological studies, so I knew about Miklós Horthy much earlier, and I can say very honestly that he was never a Nazi. He never even in deeds. He tried to hinder at least as much as possible, and in March before the German army moved into Hungary, he was in this time just going out to Hitler from himself, complaining what the dirty work the Nazis do in Hungary.
JF: You are talking now about March, ’44.
TB: In March ’44, he was exactly hammering the table of Hitler, in front of Hitler. No, nobody in history ever dared to do this and I am still amazed that Hitler did not order his people to shoot Horthy to death.
JF: Was this, was this incident well known, or was this something that was told to you by private sources?
TB: Look, I know two things, two things, both in what wide circle it was known, I don’t know, but two things. When Hitler ordered us to attack Yugoslavia, and in this time our Hungarian almost-holy scout leader, whom we liked so much, Count Pál Teleki. He was the minister president. And he said, “Okay, we regret and we want to get back our lost territories from Yugoslavia. But for us and for the present moment, for Hungarian purposes, is more important to be a good ally to them for fifteen years.” –or how long they signed the non-aggression pact; I don’t remember. I don’t have the paper before me. He said, “We signed it, and as the Hungarians for most of the time in history were honest and spiny people, we will not contradict.” But the Germans forced, and Count Pál Teleki committed suicide. He was a religious Catholic man. He said, “Under my minister presidency, this will not happen.” So with this fact and the other fact that Horthy was hammering the table before Hitler, but nobody ever dared to do, these two things were so well-known, for instance t oone of them, what Count Teleki did Winston Churchill, unfortunately they are smart but not too spiny politicians, said, “Whenever will be a peace treaty, in this room will be a chair for Count Teleki with a sign, that this would be Count Teleki, and it will be taken into consideration. Don’t worry my dear,” there was no chair and there was no sign; it was not taken into consideration.
JF: When there was a lapse in the deportations, the summer of 1944, what is your understanding of Horthy’s involvement or, in that?
TB; Yes, he was, although a Protestant, he was absolutely not an belligerent and combatant Protestant. He was a very well-balanced man, and he was in very good relation with the predecessor of Cardinal Mindszenty called Cardinal Justinian Seredi [Justin Cardinal Seredi], and Justinian Seredi talked to Horthy. Of this church matter I can give you fairly good informations. Seredi was on the way to publish an awfully harsh letter in the churches. The letter was printed. The letter was at the post office. And the Nazi spies in the post office broke the packages of the church and read the letter. And rushed both to the Nazis, rushed to Veesenmayer [the German envoy] to everybody, that for heavens sake two days from now, he will deliver them and they will be there next Sunday in the churches. And then they promised everything that the church should not do. And Seredi was in this way, I wouldn’t say that he was spineless; he hoped, and what you saw, really it was rarity for awhile, a halt, of all this because for while at least, they kept a part of their promise. And they said, “If we stop so-and-so,” but I can say again, that since Horthy had a lot of personal friendship with the Jews, he had a personal experience that Jews are not that dirty Jews and I can say yes, there are some dirty Jews, some dirty Christians, but you cannot say globally that because some of the persons are not honest, 2, 3, 4, 5, and I can put this on the entire people, except Hungarians: some of us are lousy people, fine, but you cannot say all the Hungarians are lousy; we have all good and bad. But Miklós Horthy’s personal experience convinced him that the Jews as Jews globally are not these people what Hitler would like people to believe, and Horthy did not believe it. Horthy did not want to do it. As a matter of fact, what I still cannot prove until now, that some people said that maybe among the relatives of his wife’s, there are Jews. But we still do not know, but I can say one thing for sure, that I can say for sure, with a heavy probability, that what Horthy did, he did simply because he was a man of Christian thinking, regardless if his wife had Jewish relatives or not, but I cannot prove. He did not agree with it, period.
JF: So you are saying then that it was Seredi’s letter?
TB: Yes, Seredi’s letter to be read in all churches on Sunday.
JF: The threat of that letter being read was perhaps what stopped the deportations rather than Horthy’s intervention. You think…
TB: Yes, yes. In what percentile I cannot tell you, but try to imagine a country where we are seventy, seventy-five percent Catholics. And we were quite a church-respecting people, just like the Polish in poland. So if in all our Catholic church, on the same Sunday, this letter will be read, it will have a definite amount of influence. But it doesn’t, look, Horthy had not too much more influence on Hungarian, maybe a little bit more. Number one, you talk to a man who is interested in politics but is not politician. I cannot say for sure, but what I see from many circumstances, Horthy’s influence on politics was a little bit more that the influence on the politics in England of the Queen. So he was rather a figure, a symbol, not so much feared; that’s what I see from my experience. In spite of his symbolic figureness, he had still had a greater influence on politics that the English Queen has in England, but not as much as many people would think, because many things in Hungary were running as the politicians wanted to live, not necessarily as Miklós Horthy wanted. But since most of us were Christians, which means they didn’t want anything of the legal system, don’t misunderstand, my dear audience, we have an extreme nature in good moods. We sometimes can bless and swear, which is not too nice; we can drink so good, but for extremities, they never were able to find too many Hungarian Nazis. They were never able to find too many Hungarian Communist. In the political things we are not extreme. In mood and temperament, yes, but in political extremities, if Nazis were, due to stupidity or whatever, were real Nazis, it would find, what can I say you, one and one-half percent in Hungary. The only thing that these little insignificant fragment was supported by the entire Nazi machinery. Not vague or strong. Why you think the Communists are strong in Hungary, yes, supported by a country with 250 million population? But if today Russia collapses, I think so that there would be a bloody revenge in Hungary right away. Many of the Communists would hang on the pole of the lamp, I can tell you, I am sure. Because Hungarians are awfully desperate, as we were awfully desperate under the detrimental influence of the Nazis.
JF: What is your understanding of the Arrow Cross?
TB: The Arrow Cross was the parallel of the Hakenkreuz, of the swastika. And I can imagine why they had chosen it: because the Hungarians who came from Asia, they were fighting people, soldier people, they always said the Nazis are out there, but I am so sad that these Nazi party call themself “Hungarys”, and of the Hungarian and they represent everything but the Hungarians.
JF: You feel that the Arrow Cross was not representative then of the Hungarians, that it was the Nazi?
TB: As I told you, this will come closer and closer what you are asking me. I who was so much involved in protecting Jews I saw how many Hungarians were hiding Jews, risking their own lives, that you will hear in a few minutes that my first appointment came so, that heroic Hungarian kids, and again you see here in America, they don’t believe me that heroic Hungarians kids, some of them inspired by mamas and papas, so you who listen to me try to imagine that I, as the goy, I am not in the camp, and you, the American-Jewish father and mother, will say to little Sam, “Sam, can you play near to that camp and if you see in the grass any little papers, pick them up and put them in your pocket, because maybe they were thrown out from the camp with some messages.” “Dad and I go to your synagogue, sit down, and look in the face of God, and say him God, ‘Would I encourage my child? ’” Because some of the Hungarian parents encouraged their children that play near to these transitory Jewish camp, throw so far to the ball that it should fall down very near to the camp and look in the grass, what you find, and let me come back now to say at the end of this little thing, these little papers picked up by six, seven, eight, ten, twelve Hungarian kids were taken home, and the papa or the mama or the uncle took these papers to the Apostolic Nuncio, to the Swedish Embassy, to the Portugal Embassy, and straightened out the papers and you could read, I don’t mind now, “Abraham Cohen, this and this street, I am with the Nazis in the last sixteen days. I guess that this is the first step. They move us out towards Austria. Can you help?” etc. So from these little papers, I got a list from the Apostolic Nuncio, on which were approximately forty-six, forty-eight Jews, with the request that I should go these transitional brick factory, which at this time was not working almost a year, so on the empty grounds of this factory was a very good big fence around it, so this was the transitory Jewish camp.
JF: This was in Budapest?
TB: In Budapest. Yes, in October 1944, that I should go there and try to fish out these Jews and God was so much with me that from forty-seven or forty-eight Jews, I found more that forty. I think so, forty-three I found, and these Jews, really not only I found them, but I was able to order the Nazis to take them to Sheek [phonetic] and get to Sheek [phonetic] Street No. 12. You will find a certain bookstore, because this was a Jewish house which took care of the different kind of protected Jews, this embassy and that embassy. Maybe it is good if you know not because you can’t know it from books, but why should I not tell you; there were five embassies who undertook this heroic job: the Portugal Embassy, the Spanish, the Swedish, the Swiss, and the Vatican. So we protected Jews when the almighty Nazis were so gracious to us that they allowed that a certain contingent can be protected. In our case it was a very undecent thing, because when I came, when I started to undertake the work, we had orally, and this is the thing, the Nazis and Communists, as much orally as possible because if I see a lot of oral things I can change it, very little in writing. Orally, we had the promise from the Nazis that you can protect twelve thousand Jews in 42 apartment houses. And this oral promise, was changed in a few days. I just came back to the Nunciatura Apostolica, to the Vatican Embassy in Buda. It was near the old Embassy, the Vatican Embassy to the old royal castle in Buda on the hill, and I was just coming home, and I see, “Sir, sir, Reverend,” they called me at this time, “Get fast to the telephone because just the Germans are calling you.” The Nuncio is speaking to them, and the Nuncio’s German was very poor. He spoke a Italian and French, Angelo Rota. So we get through another line, and the Germans wanted to talk to me, which didn’t happen too often, because usually we were contacted by the Hungarian Nazis, and the Hungarian Nazis were backed by the Germans, but in this time, why I don’t know, the Germans talked directly to us, and they said, “Is ready your list of the 3,000 people?” , and then I stepped in with my fluent German, and I said to them, “Gentlemen,” [can you imagine, I would like to address them, not gentlemen, something else], I said them, “Gentlemen, you make a serious mistake. You promised us that we can protect 12,000 Jews in 42 apartment houses; why are you asking about the list of 3,000?” And there was a diabolic laughter and they said [unclear] unpolite, that “You are crazy, [unclear].” “You are crazy” Tape 2, Side 1:
