Paula Ehrenberg
Q: When were you born?
A: In 1909.
Q: Where were you born?
A: In Jena.
Q: How would you describe Jena in terms of it being urban or rural?
A: It’s an urban area, it’s a beautiful small and very very old, one of the oldest university cities in Germany.
Q: How long did you live in Jena?
A: Until I was 23 years old.
Q: About what was the population of Jena?
A: About 60 to 80, later on 80, thousand people because the little towns around Jena, you know the suburbia, was included in the city.
Q: About how many Jews were there?
A: Very few. My grandparents were the first Jews living in Jena and that was about 1881, my father was 11 years old, so it must be 1882. Ten families lived there for three generations, I would say. When Jews were permitted to live in cities, my grandparents were one of the first families. There were about 10 real old families living there and of course the university had professors who did not make it a point to be Jewish so I couldn’t tell you exactly how many of these people were there so I figure, and also we didn’t have a synagogue, we didn’t have a rabbi or cantor or anything like that – only on high holy days, we engaged a preacher from somewhere and we – my first recollection of a holiday service was in a little, how should I describe it – a little inn and it smelled of bratwurst and all these delicious dishes – even on Yom Kippur and it was very frustrating (laughs). Well, you asked me how many Jews – I said 10 families and then later on – after the first world war, a few Russian Jews came to the city and a few business people so maybe it would be 40 or 50 families if you figure in those who didn’t want to be Jews or didn’t tell us they were Jews.
Q: Would you say of the 50 families that most of them were observant?
A: Most of them were not because I told you we didn’t even have a synagogue, we didn’t have religious instruction – a man came from a neighboring city and instructed us – my generation – and this was very infrequent and my parents and most of them didn’t really make it a point that we should have it.
Q: When you say a man came to instruct you, do you mean it was on a monthly basis?
A: He came, if I remember correctly, maybe twice a month but after a few years, maybe two or three years, they dropped it, it wasn’t so important.
Q: Where did you go to school?
A: In Jena, to the Lyceum.
Q: How long an education did you receive?
A: 10 years in the Lyceum.
Q: How old were you when you left?
A: I was 6 when I started and 16 when I finished.
Q: Did you continue your education?
A: Well, loosely. In practical terms, I didn’t go to higher education.
Q: What was the relationship between the Jewish and the Christian children in Jena?
A: We were very few as I told you. In the Lyceum we were three girls four girls – that was a girl by the name Elsie Freedman, Kate Blumenthal, Margot Bick and Paula Hoffman, that was me.
Q: How would you describe the relationship with the non-Jewish children?
A: Completely – these four Jewish girls were of different ages so we weren’t together in one class so we had only friendly relations – our parents were friends and we met but my friends were Christian only.
Q: Would you say the Jews were well integrated into –
A: Completely, completely.
Q: Where there any areas in which they were not integrated?
A: Not knowingly to me.
Q: how would you describe your families’ standard of living?
A: Middle class.
Q: I’m speaking of the time between World War I and II.
A: Yes.
Q: Did you father serve in the First World War?
A: Yes, of course.
Q: How were things for your family after he came home?
A: Well, they started a tobacco business and we just lived comfortably – I mean it was all right. We were not rich and we were not poor.
Q: How would you describe the morale in Jena after the loss of the First World War?
A: Well, I was a child, of course. I couldn’t tell you very much but it was like all over the world – it was the beginning of the emancipation of morals, whatever you want to call it, there were divorces then and people had boyfriends and girlfriends and things like that which was probably like all over – this I really couldn’t tell you but it started to get free and it was a university town which was always more progressive.
Q: Do you remember the inflation?
A: Yes, very much. It was very interesting time.
Q: How did it affect your family?
A: Not really very much. I mean we exchanged – one day a pound of butter – and this was in the “Blauerlaten” was the name and it was a very good place and my mother sent me there and I wanted to buy ½ lb. butter and the lady, Mrs. Tseutschler said to me “It’s forty eight thousand marks” (laughs) and this sticks in my mind so I must have been maybe 10 or 11 years old so it must have made a big impression on me and then we collected this money, you know these printed, this was called “Notegeld”
Q: Is that like ration stamps?
A: No, no, that was because it was such a continuous inflation, they just printed for instance, Jena had a special, Euringen had special money and there were pictures, they were beautifully done and it was printed and printed and printed and printed – it was a practice – people must still have this Notegeld collection – it was an interesting time but it went up and up and up and then came Rentenmark – this was the next stabilizing thing – the money was converted into Rentenmark and this started the stabilization of the money.
Q: Did you notice a great deal of unemployment during this time?
A: I know of it but only because I was told – not in my family because they were self-employed, but I know people were unemployed especially before Hitler came – maybe ’28 or ’29 when people lost their jobs – I know of one bank clerk – he killed himself because he was sure he could not find other employment – this I remember but personally I have no experience.
Q: Did you notice any differences in the Gentile attitude toward the Jews after Hitler had just come to power?
A: Of course, it was obvious. I mean there were underground Nazis then already but I cannot say that I personally experienced these things, of course, you must not forget that the people I was surrounded by were my friends and they chose me and I chose them and they knew I was Jewish so I mean of course I wasn’t exposed to any real anti-Semites but I knew of them.
Q: But none of these people who were your friends changed their attitudes at all?
A: No, none whatsoever – on the contrary – they risked their own lives and positions – my so called best girlfriend lost her position on account of our friendship in ’36. she was employed at the - this was an organization, Nationalistic organization – but in the good sense not anti-Semitic – supported by Jews and Gentiles alike before the whole thing and this was called “Verein fur das Deutschtum in Ausland” and this meant that they perpetuated German language in America and all over – most probably they were even connected with the Bund but it was not really anti-Semitic, this organization was not anti-Semitic in itself. My girlfriend was employed there as a secretary and in1936 – we were constantly openly together and everybody knew us of course and she was, one day she was called to the Gestapo and was told that she had to leave Jena because of her friendship with a Jewish girl and family and that she doesn’t belong anymore into the German groups – she is a traitor and whatever and she was really in a terrible situation. They did not put her in a concentration camp but she had to leave Jena which was a terrible blow to me and her family was until the last day with my parents – they brought them to the train where they were deported. My girlfriend even so she was thrown out of Jena, of her position, she came back to Jena and whenever she came back went to my parents. I was long then in America in England not in America and I just want to tell you of the courage that some people had. I of course lost my position with the government in 1933 when the “Gleischshaltung” came (Enabling Act) and all Jews had to leave their positions in government and in the professions but it was done with the utmost respect or whatever you want to call it. I was called to the personnel manager and he said he regrets it deeply but he has to tell my that I have to leave and so I knew this already because it was in all the papers that we had to leave so I had the presence of mind and I said but you will please give me a recommendation or a record of my – of what I did here. He certainly did and this helped me to establish my claim against Germany after.
Q: Were you able to get employment after this?
A: In lower positions, I would have but I realized I had to do something else so I went to Berlin and wanted to prepare myself for leaving and there I met my husband. My husband had to stop his medical studies and was just in the process of, as I told you before, of getting into this seminar which was just established then for Jewish elementary schools and he went there and so we lived in the same place – it was from the Jewish Women’s League – a student home and there we met and I stayed in Berlin and worked in a factory because I wanted to stay there – in a Jewish factory of course – in a raincoat factory and then in ’37 I went back home and a friend of my family had a department store which was still possible to have and he employed me as a clerk or whatever I did and then this had to be 1938. t hey also had to sell – they were forced to sell. But I got married in March ’38 anyway but in January ’38, he had to liquidate his business.
Q: Why did he have to liquidate?
A: He could still sell. By the Nazis of course, no Jewish stores anymore. He was forced to sell this place and but it was legitimate so called. I’m sure he got much less than it was worth but it was really taken over – we had to take inventory and I was still with them. It was a big place – it was little Macy’s (intended pun on Klein Macy’s)
Q: Did you know anyone personally who became a party member or a member of the Hitler Jugend?
A: Yes. They had to . This family we lived with in the same house, this young man had to become an SS man because otherwise he wouldn’t have been in a position or wouldn’t have gotten a position. They were forced to.
Q: What do you mean wouldn’t have gotten a position?
A: Whatever he wanted to do. He didn’t study but he made his arbiter and he wanted to get into a better position or even into a union – you had to be a member. If you didn’t, even so, my friends both my best friends did not join the party. One Ilse because she could not even if she wanted to but she would not ever because her father was the first Social Democrat in Jena when the party was still illegal in 18 something – he was at the famous Zeiss – you know where they make the Zeiss glasses and planetarium (equipment) – she certainly was a postal clerk and this was in Germany a very good middle class family – she did not join. She always managed to avoid it – it’s almost a miracle how she did it but these two girls who were closest to me did never, never join.
Q: And nothing happened to them as a result?
A: Except Ilse was under surveillance. She was thrown out of Jena and was under Gestapo surveillance in Berlin, she had gone to Bremen and was under Gerstapo surveillance in Berlin but she was a very beautiful girl and one of the surveillors became her friend and told her about the whole thing. I have to tell you that you get the correct picture – she was in this “Verein das Deutschtum im Ausland” and one of her colleagues was an ardent Nazi and he was the one who really told the Gestapo about her and the man who was in charge of – the so called “Oberburgemeister” in Jena was also an ardent Nazi but a former colleague of mine in the post office. He was like a supervisor and this man as the head of the Party and he had to call my girlfriend and he had to – this was really the breaking point of whether she was put into a concentration camp on account of her friendship or – and the head of this “Verein” a Mr. Griegshammer was in Berlin, the seat was in Berlin and this man came to Jena to be with my girlfriend when she was called to the Gestapo and confronted with the charge and they came there and this Mr. Griegshammer took my girlfriend and the man who told about it, about her, this was a Dr. Ofer I think was his name and when they went before this man this head of the party, this party man, Mr. Schmidt, who knew my girlfriend and he knew me – he was absolutely one of the first Nazis in Jena but a so-called good Nazi – he would not have killed the Jews you know – he said to Mr. Griegshammer “this is freulein Starke – that was my girlfriends name – he said “yes” and “who is this man?” and he said “This man is Dr. Hofer. This is the man who accused Freulein Starke” and they were naturally taken off balance by this and so she got off but she had to leave the town.
Q: At that time, did you ever think you might have to leave Germany?
A: I knew I would have to. This was already – I was back from Berlin – this was just an interim. But my husband wanted to finish his studies in Berlin.
Q: Did you ever hear the phrase “Der wird sich nicht lang anhalten”
A: Yes. That was the only hope the average person had – even the Germans thought that.
Q: How did most Jews feel about this?
A: The same way, unfortunately.
Q: Did you ever see a sign “Juden Unerwuenscht”
A: All over. In Jena when you came near the railroad station you say “Die Juden sind unser unglueck” or “Trau keener fuchs auf gruener heide, trau keener Jud bei in the wilderness and don’t truck a Jew when he swears – gives an oath.
Q: When did you become aware of the probability that you would have to leave?
A: I am pessimistic and since I was called in 1933 when this Gleishchshaltung came to my superior and I was told that I have to leave and he even said to me that it has nothing to do wit you personally. These were his word so I knew of course that we had to go. But it was not – my parents didn’t think so and you could not accept the thought that you could be thrown out – you belonged here. I here my girlfriend visiting me in Berlin after I went to Berlin. She said this can’t take long – this is impossible – but it did.
Q: You mentioned before that you met a girl in the post office. Why did you think she was typical?
A: Because she was an indication. She said to me that she would vote for Hitler because he might change things – it could only get better because of the unemployment situation and the disappointment how poorly they had to live – they had no hope to get out of their unemployment, out of their unhappiness after the first world war and of course there was also this – they were beaten by the Allies and this was hard to take.
Q: Did you husband recognize that you had to leave?
A: I don’t know really whether he did because there was also a position open once in Goeteborg in Norway or Sweden, I think it is Norway. He didn’t consider it and I said Why not – it would be wonderful but his study had to be completed. This was typical for the Germans – you had to have a certificate that you did something – without that certificate you could not progress. You always went from one stage to the other. You got a certificate now you are this and next you will be that. Like here – you get your Bachelors, then your Masters and so on. But it was absolutely essential in Germany and that’s why he most probably thought he had to do this.
Q: When you got married, where did you live?
A: In Frankfurt.
Q: Was that because of what he was doing?
A: Yes. He got this position as cantor in Frankfurt and teacher.
Q: You mentioned that you took an apartment?
A: He took an apartment (laughter)
Q: Where you opposed?
A: Yes. I was – to take an apartment, to furnish it and to establish. I knew it would be temporary and I wanted to get out as quickly as possible
Q: Was there any talk in this synagogue in Frankfurt of helping in Auswanderung?
A: Of course they helped in the Auswanderung for people who didn’t have the means but it was not – the idea of being in Frankfurt – many people from the small towns had moved into Frankfurt during that time before the 9th of Novermeber in 1938. They came from all those small towns and thought they could live in Frankfurt – I don’t know what we all thought how long this would last – but everybody hoped this couldn’t go on forever or we can live all together. We were all of a sudden thrown together so something even in Berlin like the Jultur Bund, is was of all the artists who gave performances who thought it could become something. We were all of a sudden thrown together.
Q: When did you become aware of the fact that you had to go and now?
A: This was when my husband was -we were already in contact with our American family and we had the affidavit already to come over – this was right after I got married and established in Frankfurt – we got our affidavit in August but our quota number was too high and we would have had to wait another year until our number would have been called and then came the 9th of November when he was thrown into concentration camp.
Q: How did you feel on that day when the SS –
A: Absolutely indescribable, indescribable. I mean it was near the end of everything decent in the world. I cannot express the feeling that I had. First of all, naturally, the first time I was confronted by a real criminal – they were criminals. They came early n the morning – we had already given up our apartment – we were in a furnished apartment or room with another Jewish family. We were there maybe a month and on the 9th of November, the Gestapo came and there were 2 men in Henry’s age – about 25 – and they came to Henry – the other family were Jews just as well but that was typical – they picked this one (meaning a particular one) they came in and I was in my nightgown and I was absolutely frantic. I said “What should I do now, what should I do now” and one of these guys said and until my dying day I will remember it. He said “What should you do, you should shoot yourself, you gangster – that all what’s good for you” Strangely enough, I didn’t answer and Henry was collected and he said “Can I get dressed now” and he said to me when they led him away “Don’t follow me, stay here” so the next thing I did was I got dressed, I went out, I went to the - that was the 10th of November – senior rabbi’s house and he was of very little help. He was frightened to death too of course and I went to another one, an older man – in Frankfurt they had so many that they didn’t have to take the oldest so they left the oldest home – this man was in his 70’s and I said to him what should we do and can you help me in any way. He said he was getting in contact with the English cantorial and rabbinical people and so and all of a sudden we knew that the English would let us in if we had a guarantee to be supported in England. That was all in the same day or so but I knew I had my affidavit from my relatives in America but me quota number was too high but I didn’t care – I went to Stuttdart where the American Consulate was – that was a train ride – quite a bit and full of Jewish women that night. I had a young fellow with me that night and very Aryan looking and we entered the railway station and the Gestapo were all over. We thought they knew the man just tried to escape and they spotted this boy with me and another woman and they took him. I still hear him saying “Wait for me, I’m coming back soon.” He never came back but thank God, he lived through the whole ordeal. The we went to Stuttgart and the consul was not at al helpful. He listened to me, I spoke to a Consul Teller was his name and he said “Well, I can’t do much for you, your quota number is so high, Try to get to England but he said this very, very – not involved at all, uninterested. So I called, not knowing English very well, I called south Africa. I had relatives in South Africa, I called and told them to send us money to England. We might have a chance to get out to England which they did and I got in touch with the cantroial association in England and they told me on the phone to immediately go to the consulate to the English consulate and we will arrange for all the papers possible. And of course, it was done but they were in the meantime in the concentration camp and whoever was lucky lived through it and whoever didn’t, this wouldn’t help him. So after about 3 weeks, I got all the papers together – I did something which I forgot to tell – after I went to these rabbis and to the other people who I knew were in the same situation, everybody was running, was somewhere, but they let us women do and we telephoned all over the world – not in every town naturally, that was in Frankfurt and it might not have been the same where your mother came from or anywhere else – so – now what was I going to tell you – it was very important.
Q: You mentioned that you had gone to these rabbis
A: What did I do then? Oh yes, it was important. After he (Cantor) was taken, of course I went after him and I knew he was at the police precinct and they were absolutely against the Gestaop, the police- that was a different outfit. I went in and to one of these high-ups by chance and he said to me “I can’t understand you people, why didn’t they hide in the Taunus” and I said how can you say that, they would have caught them. They were so upset they didn’t know what to say. One thing he said was that he (Cantor) wasn’t here anymore. He must be on his way to either Buchenwald or wherever. And what do you think I did? I went with a young rabbi’s wife, that was a Mrs. Lemler, we went to the Gestapo and there was a big sign at the Gestapo when you came in which said “Auskumpft an Juden wird nicht gegeben arst nach der verurteilung des Juden Greenspan” that was the one who killed that vom Rath. But I stood there at the window and then I looked in and I see faces, I would recognize them tomorrow in the street and then a man opened the window and he said “Konen sie nicht lessen?” Can’t you read? I said yes I could read but you have to tell me where my husband is. He said when was he taken. I answered this morning at 10 o’clock. This was maybe 12 o’clock and he said he is on his way to Buchenwald. All of a sudden this man was human, he could have grabbed me and said you get in here. So then, I went to Stuttgart as I told you and this man (consul) didn’t do much but then the next day coming back from Stuttgart, I went to the English consulate and there were people sitting in this tiny room, men. They were on English ground. And the English consul left them there because he knew – people from the little towns, beaten and you know, and I see that man sitting there, that old man and they kept this man there and a few others and in front of the door on the door steps were the SS standing, waiting for these men to come out. Us they let pass they didn’t even care. And I must say to the credit of many, many Christian women who were married to Jewish men, they did the same thing for their husbands, they were absolutely marvelous with few exceptions. So we sat there and we spoke to the Consul and he said you have to bring the support of all the things you can get from England and we will give you the paper that your husband is going to – admitted to England. And after three weeks or so, I got it and I went to the Gestapo and I spoke to Mr. Westenberger, I know the names, and this Mr. Westenberger said to me “Jetzt machen sie ordnung” and on the 25th of December, he was released and he came back from the Concentration camp to Frankfurt and he can tell you better what happened in the concentration camp.
Q: Did you know that you had to produce an exit visa in order for Henry to be released?
A: Of course, that was the only thing. Everyone knew this – it was common knowledge that this was the precondition to be released from the concentration camp – to have a place to go to.
Q: How did you feel on the day that you left Germany?
A: Not very good because my parents were still there and it was not a relief for me to leave them behind because I knew it would be very very difficult even so I knew they were in my hometown and my hometown, Jena, was still my hometown and the people they were with were all friends but I knew you couldn’t live, you couldn’t breath anymore.
Q: Had your parents applied for a visa?
A: Yes, they had applied for the American, for an affidavit and my cousin who sent us the affidavits also sent it to them but their quota number was even much higher than ours and you know this man this traitor, who denounced my girlfriend, was not a man from Jena, to all credit for Jena, it was a foreigner, a stranger from the French border, a guy who had nothing to do with – it would have never happened I must say even so as I told you, the head of the party was a man working in the post office that knew me – but this would have never happened to us, to her, if not for this man who wanted her position or one of his girlfriends in and get her out.
Q: Were you at all angry at having to leave?
A: Angry, no angry is not the word. I was – there was no feeling left for me. I was frightened for my parents and I knew this would be on the end almost impossible to get them out because we didn’t have enough money to do that and the high quota numbers and it was always first young people out, young people out and the good ones stayed behind.
Q: How long were you in England?
A: One year and then our quota number was up and we were called and they gave us – it was the time before the London Blitz – we left I think on the 9th of January and the blitz started about a month or a week later.
Q: Did you come to New York?
A: We landed in Nova Scotia in Canada and we had a convoy until the middle of the Atlantic and all of a sudden one morning the convoy was gone so we were most probably in safer waters somewhere near Canada. We had to go in zigzag and not a direct route on account of the U boats.
Q: Did you intend to settle in New York?
A: Yes, because my family was here, my cousin, the cousin who gave us the affidavit was here. They were American born, they let us come and he was a very fine man.
Q: How did you earn a living in those beginning days in New York?
A: I was here a week and I was with refugee relatives who were here before us and I got a household position – not a sleep in I just stayed there from morning until supper time. They were originally Germany but long long before, like my cousin’s mother who came when she was a young girl. So I was there and then I had a cousin in Bridgeport, Connecticut whose husband was an established doctor already, a half a year before we came (laughs) and they had connections with very very wonderful Hungarian people and he employed all the refugees, whomever he could get hold of he employed and she called my husband to Bridgeport and finally we moved to Bridgeport after about a month. We established in Bridgeport our little home and then came this position at the Hebrew Tabernacle in New York and again after a month, I came to New York and worked here in a clothing factory and did all kinds of jobs.
Q: How did you feel about having to begin again especially –
A: This was no problem at all, not at all, in no way.
Q: Did it bother you to have been middle class in Germany and then –
A: Not at all, never, I didn’t regret it for a minute and I didn’t feel in anyway sorry for myself, not a bit.
Q: Did you find language a barrier at all?
A: Yes, that wasn’t easy but the living conditions, that it was less than I should or would be living there, this didn’t bother me.
Q: What did you do for recreation in those days?
A: Ach nothing, nothing (laughs heartily) We got together with the others but we were already very much involved in this congregation you know, and I had my little job in the clothing factory and I was very tired, I worked very hard and so recreation, oh yes, must say that after two or three years we went already a few days to Fosterdale, you know, a place up in Ulster or Sullivan county.
Q: Yes, in the Catskills.
A: It was a very inexpensive place and we were all together. And these people we met there are still friends of mine. But really a vacation, or theater or movie, we didn’t go. And then was always this thing on my mind with my parents because in England, I got already the news that they were deported.
Q: How did you get the news?
A: This was directly through the Red Cross. My parents wrote to me and everything was always in code. They wrote that on Sept. 9th, we will go away with Clara, that was a friend of my mother’s, and we send you love and then I knew. And then we knew in England, this was common knowledge, you knew there was Theresienstadt and that was it.
Q: Where did they go?
A: Theresienstadt.
Q: When did you get the news that they weren’t living?
A: Right after the end of the war, immediately. And it was a very unhappy thing, unhappy of course, but it was so awful – my mother was transported to Auschwitz with the last transport form Theresienstadt – and my father died in Theresienstadt.
Henry interrupts to remind Paula about a friend This Ilse who was so much in danger sent packages through our help cleaning woman to my parents – the cleaning woman sent the packages and her code name was Fritzchen. I have from Theresidenstadt letters to this cleaning woman – cards which said “Liebe Frau Taubitzer”, my father wrote it, “wir haben ibren packet bekommen, grusse an Fritzchen (Ilse)”
Q: How did you get the cards?
A: Mrs. Taubitzer, after the war, sent them to me.
Q: They were in Theresienstadt for quite a while, then
A: Until 1945, can you imagine, they could have survived that one more transport (terrible sadness)
Q: Have you ever been back to Germany?
A: Almost every year since 1962. The first time I was there was in 1953, then 1961, 63 and then a few years not and then almost every year thereafter.
Q: Have you ever been back to Jena?
A: No, never. It is the eastern zone.
Q: How do you feel when you go back?
A: The first time it was horrible, absolutely horrible but since I couldn’t go home and these were strange places to me, it wasn’t so bad but it was a terrible feeling. I can tell you of the first visit that I didn’t even know what the people looked like. I didn’t look into their faces, I only met my friends and it was very very upsetting for all of us, not so good.
Q: When you say you didn’t look into their faces –
A: I mean it literally, I mean I couldn’t tell you if they were well fed – I just didn’t see them. It was the strangest thing. When I came back, people asked me what do they look like. I said I must tell you I don’t know what they looked like. I had no contact with anyone except these absolutely (good friends) my people.
Q: Later on, on subsequent visits, did you ever have - -
A: Contact with other people? Yes, for instance, I looked for this even. I was once in Germany with a friend and Henry met us in Switzerland and on the way from Germany to Switzerland, we sat in the train and we discussed a few things with the people sitting around – where do you come from? They were very nosy, where do you come from? We come from America. Naturally, they saw, at least me, that we were Jews, that time there weren’t so many Italians yet in Germany, you know. Now you can be taken for an Italian, or a Greek but at that time, they noticed right away that I must be a Jew. One was a younger man and one was a Nazi and he was very suspicious and this was not true, everything. I said I can tell you that it is true, I lost my family completely and that it was very very bad and I explained to them that we of course even then in Germany we could live from 1933 to 1938 because we had our own culture. And he said how do you treat your Negroesin America, the Nazi said. First of all, we don’t exterminate them as you did with us and secondly, we could fall back on our culture but these poor people in America have nothing – just not they are starting. These were the arguments I was look for. They younger man was of course completely upset about what happened and would not or could not forgive his parents and that they even kept quite. They had no – look even they did not know how it is and you cannot understand how it is when you are confronted with a real criminal. You are completely made dead – you are so frightened like an ape when a snake comes towards him – he is frozen. You were absolutely frozen. There were people who of course stood up for their rights and they were killed – this was the outcome. There were only two ways – either you were killed or you tried to be really dead alive. And then the next thing I had with a stranger was also on a train and the first thing of course, the older generation like my generation, my contemporaries, they say immediately what they did for the Jews, that’s the first thing you hear. Of course, we knew so and so and he said, Ach Alse wir haben naturlich das und das gemacht und jo’welder. And I cut them short then and said to this man, this was a very very successful business man apparently and he said “Meine urgrossemutter war auch Judische, ich habe judisches blut” and I said “so, das is ja sehr schon” then I said “you know, I want to tell you something if you would have know you would be so prosperous that was the height of prosperity in Germany when I said that, if you would have know how capable you are, you wouldn’t have killed all the Jews” “Ach, das will ich nicht sagen, das war ja nicht der grund” he said. These things I looked for later, but not for friendly contacts but only to put them. To let them know who they are which doesn’t help much anyway. But the younger generation , I must tell you is absolutely free of these terrible things and even so, they were not taught in school what happened, for instance, my friend’s boys, they despised even their wonderful, wonderful parents that they didn’t die with the others, honestly. So upset they are about their own cowardice, that they let it happen, you know. They cannot understand how this could happen. And I read in one of these articles the other day one of the young students said he saw the Hitler picture now, they show the pictures now and I think it’s a good thing because it shows how ridiculous these people were, how ridiculous this man behaved and so he said it is unbelievable that this clown could drown a whole world into such misery – that’s how they feel. There are certainly others also, like here too, you know like you had Nazis here. But the younger generation is not to be blamed and should not be blamed and they should be given a chance because it makes no sense. You are not responsible for what your father did.
