NAME: PHILIP CARLQUIST INTERVIEWER: KAETHE SOLOMON DATE: SEPTEMBER 1, 1978
CAMP: BUCHENWALD
A: I guess you have seen some of the pictures of the bodies stacked up in a circle like cordwood. They left them there for three days.
Q: When you came in there, you knew that they had left them there for three days? A: No, it was the first day that I went in there.
Q: You were one of the first units to enter?
A: None of them entered [unintelligible]. They just went over and took control of it, and then some went in to tell them that they didn't have to worry. Then they sent in a kitchen group and a clean up group and then the clean up group called the surgeon of the First Army. I was with the First Army and the First Army was first in everything. We made the invasion of France. We were the first ones into Belgium. We took Paris. We were the first ones in the Netherlands. We were the first ones in Germany. We were the first ones across the Rhine.
Q: You were number one all the way around.
A: All the way. And before we left Jena, we'd been to a small town called Kovach. I was in the advance group of our unit, and about three weeks before, some guys in the First Division had got into an Arbeit Amt 1 there. They had cracked open the safe and got out two and a half million marks, which were worth 10 cents a piece. We found a big safe in this Arbeit Amt so the sergeant and I went to work on the darn thing and opened it up. It took us five hours and we got 100 marks which is $10.00 but more important, we had the records of everybody in that
1A work office whole geographic area as to when they had joined the Nazi Party and for Intelligence this was great. We had the ones that joined in 1933 and 1934 when they were just starting the Nazi Party.
Q: The beginning of the set-up, the Nazi set-up.
A: That was the beginning of it and then, of course, when Hitler got power, everybody had to join. But this Intelligence was great because they had the records of the people that were first active in the Nazi Party.
Q And you were able to give it to somebody in....
A: Yes. We turned the whole thing over. It was a great big safe and it had the records of 100,000 people, as to when they had joined the Nazi Party.
Q: So you were really part of a very important historical finding. A: Intelligence liked that.
Q: I'm sure. When did you get into Jena to the best of your recollection? A: I think it was early April. I'm not sure.
Q: Of 1945?
A: Yes. I think we crossed the Rhine about the 20th of March. I just don’t remember.
Q: It's hard to recall those dates.
A: What happened there was that the 8th Division liberated people in the Klingelputz Prison, which is in Cologne, and this was our first experience with what to do about prisoners.
Q: Were you told before you got there anything you were going to see or given any orders as to what you would have to do?
A: No. Actually, in the Prison at Klingelputz there was nothing particularly there.
It was just a regular prison. It was a city prison.
Q: A criminal prison?
A: Except that over 50% of the people there were on their way to the camps and 50% were criminals. What happened was that they had a breakout of typhus in that prison. When the 8th Division liberated them, they threw open the doors and said, "Everybody go." They were going to be real good to them. So they all left but most of them were coming down with typhus.
Q: And took the typhus with them.
A: And took the typhus with them. And, of course, then it began to show up. The prisoners knew the Americans were definitely going to be there, and the day after we were there the political prisoners all came to the surface. But the criminals did not.
Q: They thought they had to run.
A: Dr. Schneider and I spent three or four weeks tracing typhus up and down the Rhine Valley. I was taken away from my unit and worked with him.
Q: How did you go about tracing typhus up and down the Rhine Valley?
A: We had to contact the local German physicians and they got somebody with the peculiar illness. They got [unintelligible] what we had to do...by this time it was presenting a problem and we learned how to handle it a little bit better. What we did was set up road blocks and everybody who went through had themselves and their clothes dusted with DDT, and that stopped it. But we still had to find isolated outbreaks.
Q: When you contacted the German doctors, had you already seen the results of the concentration camp at that time?
A: No, because this was at Klingelputz and there were no...Dachau was down by Munich and Auschwitz was in Poland, and Buchenwald was in Germany.
Belsen, I guess, was up in north Germany and the Russians got Belsen. It is now Poland, but it was then north Germany and east Prussia and we didn’t get to that; but we got to Buchenwald and Dachau at about the same time. But it was different Armies. Dachau was down by Munich and Buchenwald was just outside of Jena.
Q: I hear your German is fairly good, too. Did you speak German before you entered?
A: [In German] Yes, I spoke. I understand. Q: [In German] You speak German.
A: That was one of the reasons why I'm a little bit funny about these dates. We spent three weeks taking blood samples from people and checking them out. We ran onto one woman that was working as a maid in a German household.
Q: This is a German civilian?
A: Yes, and she was the loneliest woman in the world. She spoke a relatively rare east German, east Russian dialect and she was working in this house and she had not found anybody in two years that she could speak to. Then we did find one of our linguists that could talk to her because she was positive [for typhus]. I don't know how long she had had her typhus. She had it a long time ago in [unintelligible] in Mongolia. And this is one of the strangest things about war you find [laughter]. How in the world she got approximately 3,000 miles away from her homeland and was working as a maid in this German family.
Q: Incredible. With no ability to communicate. A: How lonely her life must have been.
Q: Incredibly so. What were the methods you used once you got into Buchenwald?
A: Somebody thought maybe we ought to try to find out how many entire diseases there were and how many of them had them. So this was one of the things we did. We went in and got some samples. I just took ten stool samples back from just ten patients. We didn't call them patients -- they were inmates. Every single one of them had one or two [unintelligible] strains of salmonella or something like that. So there was no point in doing anything, because every one of them was infected.
Q: Were these people well enough to give you the stool samples?
A: It's amazing how much the human body can stand. I am sure that there were men and women there who were less than 50% of their normal weight, even less.
Q: And still systematically they functioned.
A: They were still functioning even with all of the disease that they had and the poor malnourishment. One thing we found out was if you gave them a good meal, you could kill them. Their body wasn't used to it. So they brought in a nutritionist to try to give them chicken soup (laughs), but they left. They had these piles of bodies that they left for two or three days. I didn't go back and see how long they left them. I didn't feel that there was anything I could accomplish and I just didn't want to have to look at it again.
Q: You wanted to be relieved of that particular duty?
A: I was relieved of it. I didn't ever have to go back. I just went in there the one time. I did get the pictures and they were such terrible pictures that when I got them home my wife destroyed them. She tore them up. She couldn't believe it; she tore them up.
A: Unbelievable. Do you remember how you felt when you first saw them? Those are hard things to recall. . I can understand.
Q: We went in a jeep. Then I got out of the jeep [unintelligible] and then I was supposed to go down and see some of these people; and when I came to the first heap of bodies I just couldn't believe what I was seeing. I guess I just had to stop and wait, and then I finally brought them out of their place to get the stool samples that I was supposed to get. I went past them. The buildings they had for these people were not very wide. They were quite long and they had a door at each end and a couple of doors on the side, and they were wood framed and there was nothing to keep out the cold in the winter. And it got cold there. A certain number would die in each barracks every night. The inmates had to take their own dead out in order to make it easy for them to clean it up. Waiting for them to bury were SS staff men. And they didn't want to work very hard, so on the end of every building were a bunch of standard meat hooks, like so, hanging down. . The prisoners would bring out the dead and just slap them up and put them on that hook so the fellows coming along on the wagon didn't have to reach down and pick up the bodies; they just took them up on the hook and threw them on the wagon. There were still some of those hung up on the hook.
Q: You saw that? A: Yes.
Q: That's a pretty difficult thing to be part of. Were the inmates afraid when they saw you?
A: No. The first day they didn't pay any attention to us one way or the other. Then the second day, they started to talk to some of the people and I talked to one or two of them while I was getting the samples. And they didn’t say anything.
They still were kind of stunned. As I understand later they did talk to some of us. Then we put up our unit in a place which was called Zeiss Kinder Haus.
Q: Children's Home.
A: Yes, it was sponsored and financed by the Zeisswerks in [unintelligible] in Germany. And we used that place for our laboratory and also for our men to sleep in. We just took over an apartment next to us, threw the Germans all out of it, and then took over their rooms and those apartments where the officers used to sleep. But we would go down into Jena once in a while and see what was going on. After these inmates began to get strength, many of them would come into town. They were offered clothing but they wore their striped gray and white uniforms and I think they wore them as a badge of honor.
Q: Honor of survival? Would that be an accurate description?
A: I don’t know if it was honor of survival or honor that they had been persecuted. Not only that they had survived, but they wanted people to know that they were some of those that had been especially selected.
Q: How did you feel about that?
A: I thought that was fine because every time the Germans saw them, they cringed. Q: They did react?
A: Sure did, because what they did was they would take the Burgermeister and he influenced the civilians and made them go through there.
Q: Were you there when they went through there?
A: I saw one group but I was not close enough to really see their reaction, but I know what it was. It was not good.
Q: Did they take any of the civilians and insist on them burying the dead? Did you see any of the burial take place?
A: No I did not. I just went in the one time and I just don’t know what happened after that, except I was told that they were going to leave them there until they got a lot of people educated.
Q: To let them see what had been going on. Were there any definite orders given to you? I didn't get some of the specifics. You were in what Division?
A: 1 was in the 10th Medical Laboratory. Q: A medical laboratory.
A: It was the medical laboratory that served all the hospitals that were assigned to the First Army. We had evacuation hospitals, field hospitals. We didn't have any general hospitals, because general hospitals were back where the lines were. We did have evacuation hospitals and special surgical hospitals; not so much special surgical hospitals but they were like the MASH units.
Q: Field hospitals of some sort?
A: A field hospital was sometimes [unintelligible]. This kind of hospital was huge. Evac hospitals are two sizes -- 400 bed and 750 bed. And we would go through these little places and they would have surgical teams and different types put on because we always were ahead of that. We found out if we were going to do our jobs, if we were going to help anybody, we had to be where they were.
Q: So were you writing out any orders for those that were to follow you and come into the camps?
A: No. All we did was do the laboratory work and return the results to the surgeon's office the first time. It was their responsibility to advise the army commander as to what he was to do. All we did was the lab work.Q: And how did you know about the typhus? Just when you got in there or before you entered the camp?
A: Before I entered the camp, I knew about it because [unintelligible]. I had to contact the German laboratory director. But I could not find the German laboratory in Kassel. We were supposed to go there, but Kassel had been bombed four times and there was nothing there -- no water, no nothing and I couldn’t find the Hygienische Arnt in Kassel. There was supposed to be one, but we never could find it and then we went from there.
Q: Hygienische Amt? The Public Health Office.
A: Then when we got to Jena that was again. They had a [unintelligible] group, so I went to the Hygienische Amt that I found and this is where I met this Professor Schneider and I had to see him the first day I got there which was the day [unintelligible]. And he told me that he had gotten water samples from the drainage ditches out of Buchenwald and he had isolated typhoid and shigella organisms and the rest of them out of the water, and he had demanded entry to find out what was going on. Of course, he had been refused.
Q: This was a German professor?
A: He had a three-headed position. He was a professor of bacteriology in the medical school of Jena. He was director of the Hygienische laboratory for the regional area of Jena; that is, Landkreis2. He also was the director of the laboratory services for the Ninth [unintelligible] of the German Army. So he was an Oberst. So he did have the triple function of being the chief laboratory officer in the army area. He was also chief of the Hygienische Institute for the Rhine. They have a Hygienische Institute in Heidelberg, and another one in Frankfurt and in the big cities, but each one of them serves a Landkreis, so he had the three of them and he had tried to get them...this is why, after I talked to him, that I called Operations and said that I had heard this report. This is why they said you have to go in there; we will find out. So the next day is when I had to go in.
Q: Did you question him at all in terms of his [unintelligible] as to what was....
A: He wanted me to tell him what was going on because he had been trying to get information out of there, because he felt it was a menace to the German civilian population for which he was responsible.
Q: But he was in no way involved?
A: He couldn't get in; they wouldn’t let him in because he was not SS. Q: Did he tell you that he was not a member of the Nazi Party?
2County, rural district
A: Oh, yes. I mean that was thoroughly investigated because...[unintelligible] with him and several other people. A lot of them working with the [unintelligible] because Jena was supposed to be given over to the Russians. [Unintelligible] they had the thing and we were supposed to have sent some of our men to Berlin for the parade but they never did.
Q: For the parade?
A: They never did ask for us.
Q: What parade were you referring to?
A: The Victory Parade after VE Day. And we were supposed to send not me, but I guess our veterinarian because he looked more military than the rest of us.
Q: A veterinarian? You had a veterinarian in your... A: Yes, (laughter) yes, we had a veterinarian.
Q: And the veterinarian served a function also?
A: Oh, yes, because we had horses and dogs, and he also had a responsibility for seeing that the food was good, [unintelligible] was good in the First Army. But this was quite a job. When we were caught in the snow in January, we had a little trouble getting people out of the [unintelligible] Forest. There were 1000 men that got killed or wounded before nine o'clock every morning and we had trouble getting them out. So someone got the bright idea of getting some husky dogs from Alaska. And the dogs arrived some time in March when the snow was disappearing. [laughter]
Q: Oh, the huskies didn't do too much good in March?
A: They didn't do any good but our veterinarian had to take care of them, and we did use mules or horses to get some of these guys out and he had the responsibility of taking care of those too.
Q: So you really saw a lot of your own men killed?
A: Yes.
Q: As we interview some of our liberators, who had seen so much death around them and then see the type of death in the concentration camps, I am wondering if you think perhaps the effect was no longer as great on them?
A: Oh definitely so because I was hard as nails. Nothing meant anything to me.
After the war I volunteered to stay on because I knew it wasn't over. I didn't get sent home right away. They sent me down to Marseilles -- first to Cannes with the hospital there, then to Marseilles. When I was in Marseilles, one of the things that I saw was a black soldier [unintelligible]with some French girl and the MP told him "You better watch out." The black soldier said, "I'll take care of her and I'll even go back and take care of your sister." And the MP said, "The hell you will" and he pulled out his 45 pistol and shot him dead. I just walked down the street and let it go at that. I figured this black just got out of line.
Q: It was part of your total living environment for many years. A: Yes.
Q: So, the actual inmates that you saw at the camp really took on a different appearance?
A: I'm sure they didn't affect me nearly as greatly as they did the German civilians that had gone through there because I had become inured to a certain extent, but still it was bad. The best thing that happened to me -- it probably kept me from getting into trouble -- was when I came home. I lived in Salt Lake City, just outside of there, and my wife picked me up and we went home. I asked my wife “Is there a place we can go to have some drinks?” So we had a couple of drinks or so and she said something, and I reached over and hit her; I didn't hit her, but slapped the side of her face. Her brother said, "Well, you're a lot bigger. Don’t hit her. If you are going to hit somebody, hit me." And I hauled off and smacked him. Bang. And he just went down. Of course, it was totally out of character as the way I had been.
Q: When you left.
A: When I left. And I think it was a good thing for me that it happened because the next morning, when I realized what I had done, it shook my character back to a certain extent.
Q: Which really showed you what had happened while you were there.
A: I realized what had happened to me. When we were in New York, another fellow and I decided that we were supposed to be kept in because we had not been debriefed. They had us in this camp and we decided that we wanted to have some civilian food. It had been a long time since we'd been in the United States, so he and I thought we’d just go to a little town right near the camp.
Q: Where was the camp?
A: It was up the Hudson River some where. And so, we got to the gate and here was an MP and he said, "You can't go out." We looked at him and said, "What the hell you mean we can't go out?" "You can't go out That's the orders." I said, "Well, we're going." [unintelligible] So the MP said, "I'll shoot you." So I said, "Go ahead and shoot." And, of course, he didn't, but we were lucky that he had not been an MP in Germany or we would have been shot.
Q: Do you think that it has taken many veterans a long time to rid themselves of... A: I'll tell you I think it’s dependent on their stability to begin with.
Q: How long were you in the service? A: I went in in 1942 and that was....
Q: And you returned to the United States?
A: In 1945. Q: While we are on some vital statistics, I will ask you a few questions for the record. I need your full name.
A: Philip Rich Carlquist. Q: Carlquist.
A: C-A-R-L-Q-U-I-S-T. Q: Your address'?
A: 1351 Chalmette Drive, N. E., Atlanta, 30306. Q: And your date and place of birth?
A: Salt Lake City, March 25, 1910.
Q: Another non-native of Atlanta, right?
A: I'd never been a day in Atlanta until I retired from the Army and came here. Q: Your age at the time of liberation?
A: I was 35 years of age.
Q: And your prospective profession at the beginning of the war had already been established.
A: I do exactly the same thing now as I did before the war and all the time. Q: And specifically, what is your work?
A: Medical laboratory work . Specifically bacteriology. Today is an anniversary.
It’s 48 years today that I went to work in a hospital laboratory.
Q: Congratulations. That's a long time.
A: First of September, 1930 was when I first went to work in a hospital laboratory. Q: Incredible. What hospital was it?
A: Salt Lake General Hospital. I've seen a lot of changes. You can’t imagine. Q: I am sure. Your military unit, specifically.
A: When I was called back to duty, I was sent out to Barnes General Hospital, Vancouver Barracks. I was supposed to be there only a year, but the war broke out before the year was up. Then I got transferred to the First Medical General Laboratory which was to go to England and operate for the whole European Theatre of Operations. We had it very good in England because we took over buildings that had been built for a unit from Harvard by the Red Cross. They had built them in 1940 and I was sent over to them as an assistant to the British. As you know, the Red Cross won’t spare a dime.
Q: You had some very fine quarters there?
A: Oh, yes. Sure did. We had a service of Spode. We could seat 100 people with sterling flatware no less.
Q: Sterling flatware!
A: I don’t know what happened to it afterwards. I was chief of bacteriology in that unit and everybody else could do research but me, because they were always expecting an outbreak of an epidemic of a bacterial disease, but we never had it.
Q: In England?
A: Yes. We never had it. There were a couple of things that came up that were hard and made interesting studies, but after they were solved, there was nothing to them. For instance, there was something with gas gangrene and the airmen that got shot up in the air because they always thought that gas gangrene was an infantryman's disease but these guys in the Bl7s got gas gangrene, too. And we had to figure out why that was and we did and it was stopped. So I didn't have anything to do and I was about going nuts. I did help them to create a blood bank, but then I couldn't have command of it because I was Sanitary Corps officer, Medical Corps officer. They took me out of that.
Q: Because you were sanitary officer and the medical corps officer you were not permitted to be involved in the blood bank?
A: No, I could not take command of it. They put someone else in command of it, then I said I was getting bored stiff, so they let me go. They said, "All right, you can join the 10th Medical Laboratory and go in on the invasion. At least, you'll get some excitement.” And I did. I was very happy about that. So I left the First Medical General Laboratory and joined the 10th Medical Laboratory and we went into France. The night we got in was actually D plus three -- The third day after D-Day. We had been given a spot where we were supposed to set up our unit and we couldn’t get it because it was still ten miles behind the German lines. They had not been as successful as they planned.
Q: How long were you in France?
A: From June 9, 1944...and I think we got out of France into Belgium in September of 1944.
Q: And you stayed in Belgium for a while?
A: Until. they made the break out the next spring over the river and clear into Germany. We were in Foyfen and that was a part of Belgium where they all spoke German and, actually, the Germans had reincorporated into Germany right at Aachen; it was ten miles from Aachen. We took over a building that had been built originally as a Jugendherberge.
Q: A youth hostel type.
A: Yes, but they bombed out the [unintelligible] in Aachen and so the Chemistry Department had moved out and had taken over this building. We took it over and used it for a laboratory. It was ideal for us.
Q: You brought all your own equipment with you? Did you get any equipment from the Germans?
A: Some of them, we did. Until we got to Aachen, I had had very poor incubators for myself, but in Aachen in one of the schools, I just....
Q: Just went in there and helped yourself?
A: Yes, I got a good incubator which I needed. But in this building we found three containers each one a thousand kilograms of mercury. This was extremely valuable and that was sent back to the U.S. right away, the next day. With the war, it was absolutely essential to have [unintelligible]. You can imagine 2 1/2 tons of mercury.
Q: No, I don't think I can imagine.
A: This was sent back and it was really worthwhile. And the other thing we found was telephones in this building. They turned out to be quite interesting because we picked one up and they were speaking German. We had a young man we called Ossi because he was very quiet and shy. He was a Jewish boy from Vienna; and so someone called Ossi to come and listen to what was going on and he listened and he got startled.
Q: Startled?
A: It was somebody in the SS talking to somebody else in the SS [unintelligible].
So we called Intelligence and they followed the wires down and we caught some SS troops that had been left behind our lines.
Q: Because of the conversation between the two SS men that was overheard?
A: Yes, because this had been a central listening post for the SS people and they just followed those telephone lines back and caught some that were still back there as spies. We had to evacuate the areas around the front lines, because if we didn't, the units would be shelled because there were people there somehow who were getting word over to the Germans as to where we were. So we just got all civilians and put them in buildings behind the lines.
Q: Did you come across many young children roaming around in Germany? A: Not then. At that time, no.
Q: There was a time when you did?
A: I went back. I had to go to Copenhagen in 1947 to a meeting of the International Association of Microbiologists. I went through Germany, and there were lots of kids around then. Nobody to take care of them.
Q: Nobody to take care of them? A: Just wandering.
Q: Did you talk to any of them?
A: No, because there really weren't many I would have anything to do with. I mean that's the way more or less I felt like. There was a little girl that we got very friendly with in 1945 when we went to Jena and the reason I did was because she behaved exactly like I taught my children to behave. She was about eight or nine years old. Our soldiers came and she lived in the house next to us and she threw rocks at them.
Q: She threw rocks at whom?
A: At the American soldiers. Her mother got kind of perturbed about it so her mother came to talk to me about it and I said, "Well, don't think anything of it." What she had been taught was that the Americans were no good, that they were terrible people, so she used to throw rocks at them. And I said, "Just tell her not to do it any more." I talked to her and I could see my daughter who was exactly the same age. She had been taught all her life that these people were nasty people, to throw rocks at them, and she would. The rest of the German kids then asked for chocolates, chewing gum, and stuff like that as soon as the soldiers came. But not this little girl; she threw rocks and I thought this was great.
Q: She was angry. It was based on what she had been taught.
A: She had been taught. She believed in what she had been taught.
Q: What was your feeling about the German people after you went to the camp and saw what you did see?
A: I thought they were terrible. This is why I had no part of it. Then I went back in 1950 with [unintelligible]. There I made them all speak English to me.
Q: The German people?
A: Yes, [unintelligible] they could speak English. I kind of divided them into groups. Some of them I got a feeling had been Nazi and I had no part of them and others were not too bad. There were a couple of professors I knew--some of whom I thought were terrible, others not.
Q: The professor that you told me had these wide responsibilities, the one that you had been told to contact, were you ever able to ask him as to exactly how this typhoid got started?
A: It was highly endemic in the people in Poland. Some of them had been brought there and put in the camps, and then, of course, it had just gone from one to the other.
Q: He didn't tell you of any experimentation that took place?
A: We didn't even bother with it, because it was just too large a problem and we got him out. We took him out so he was not left to the Germans. In 1950, when I went back to Germany, I met him again and then he was director of the Hygiensche Amt at Frankfurt and Professor of Bacteriology at the medical school at Frankfurt.
Q: Do you correspond? Do you still keep in touch?
A: He's probably dead now. He was much older than I. He's probably been dead. Actually, he came to the United States in 1948 as an honored guest and I met him then. He told me where he was so when I went to Germany in 1950 I went up to Frankfurt to see him.
Q: So you never really discussed any of the sociological or political... A No.
Q: You wouldn't touch that.
A: I made them speak English to me unless I thought they were [unintelligible]. And when we moved from Heidelberg to Lansfeldt we had trouble getting the house fixed up right and my wife said I had to come and talk to the workers so we could get it done right. I came back from the laboratory and met the workmen and told them what we wanted to do. We went through the house and he said, "Yes, Yes." So he left. And then I said to my wife "I don't see why in the world you have so much trouble with the guy. He speaks English good." And she just about whacked me with the frying pan because there had not been one word of English spoken from the time he started. [laughter].
Q: Oh, you were communicating in German?
A: I could talk to him in German if I wanted to but I didn't want to.
Q: You decided you would stick to your...It's your way of saying, “Now you are going to do it the way I feel that I want you to do it."
A: But this one I did, but maybe others, too.
Q: You had your family with you there, Dr. Carlquist? A: I had my wife, my daughter, and my two sons.
Q: That was in 1950. While you were in the Service, you had a family at home in the States?
A: Oh, yes. You see, my daughter is 44 years of age.
Q: Did you write of your experiences at the camps to your family? A: No.
Q: Nothing at all?
A: I did not write and, actually, I didn't say much about it when I came back. . But I did bring quite a few pictures -- pictures of me, pictures of other people, and the pictures of the heaps of bodies were in that group. My wife went through those and took them out and destroyed them so the kids would never see them.
Q: Have the kids ever heard about your experiences since that time? Have you seen the Holocaust TV movie?
A: No, I didn’t look at it.
Q: Did you know it was going to be on and you purposely did not? A: No. I purposely did not look at them.
Q: Why?
A: I just didn't feel I wanted to. I had seen all I wanted to; I didn't need any reminder.
Q: The reminder is painful.
A: The reminder would be painful and I don't want any more reminders. Q: I can understand that, certainly. Did your children see that movie?
A: I have no idea.
Q: You have no idea.
A: My daughter lives in Philadelphia, my son lives in Oklahoma City, and the other one lives in Glendale.
Q: And they don't know what you experienced? A: No. They know where I was.
Q: But they do not know what you saw. A: No, they do not know what I saw.
Q: Did the publicity on the Holocaust TV show bring back the memories of what you had seen?
A: The publicity was there, but I did not read a single thing about any of it. Every time I saw "Holocaust", that was it.
Q: You tuned it out completely.
A: I tuned it out completely. And I still probably will. Q: The pain of having seen it is too great?
A: Well, it's not any pain but there is no point to me in seeing it because....
[End of Side One. Conversation resumes on Side Two as follows]
A: A lot of other people did; I never did.
Q: Well, once you've seen that.... A: Once you've see it, you don't want any more of it.
Q: Are you a religious man, Dr. Carlquist? A: Not really.
Q: What is your religious...?
A: I'm a Mormon to start with, but I don't follow all the things and they made a big thing out of things that I feel are not too big. So as a result I don’t go to church, but I don’t go to any other church. I couldn’t go to any other church.
Q: Did anything happen to your feelings about religion when you saw what you saw at Buchenwald?
A: It didn't have any effect on me.
Q: It had no effect on you? Did you see the concentration camp as being particularly pointed at one type of people; for instance, the Jews or the Gypsies, or the mentally retarded? How did you see it?
A: From what I saw even in Buchenwald they had criminals. Q: Yes, they had a criminal element there.
A: Yes, a criminal element. For example, one of the famous things that was made was the so-called lamp shades that the Beast of Buchenwald had made out of these tattoo skins. But I'm sure those came from criminals, because in all my life I have never seen a Jew with a tattoo on his body.
Q: You have not see any?
A: No. I mean I have seen Jews with tattoos, but they were the numbers tattooed on their arms for identification purposes when they were put in the camps. I have never to the best of my knowledge seen a Jew with tattoos.
Q: Are you saying the lampshades had tattoos on them? The skins had pictorial tattoos that were used.
A: Didn't you remember the stories of the Beast of Buchenwald, the Bitch of Buchenwald, the one that had the tattoo?
Q: The one of Belsen I remember.
A: There was one of Buchenwald and she had these lampshades made out of the tattooed skin that were taken off of someone that died. Now, I didn't see them, but I know people who did see them. A lot of the German sailors were tatooed and I am sure that all of those skins were taken off of criminals that were in there because, as I say, I have never seen a Jew in my life that’s been tattooed.
Q: That's an interesting observation.
A: And I'm sure they are made out of criminal's skin, because I've never seen a Jew that's been tattooed. I never could understand why people wanted to be tattooed.
Q: It is a difficult thing to understand, isn't it? Dr. Carlquist, after you were in Buchenwald, the first time you went in...A.. The one time I went in. I didn't go back. I did not have to go back.
Q: Did you share what you saw that one time with any of your fellow workers?
A: With my commanding officer, of course, and we had talked it over because I had to go with him; he had to go back me up so we didn’t have to go back.
Q: Was that a medical conversation or an emotional...?
A: Strictly medical. I said I couldn’t do any more good there. I mean with all the thousands they had in there, if we tried to do any diagnostic work, we couldn't do it; it was beyond our scope. I mean it was too big a problem and so there was no point in trying. All you could do was just feed them and hope they got better.
Q: The German civilians that you saw afterwards, did you ever talk to them about what you saw at the [unintelligible]?
A: I didn't see any, except I talked to [unintelligible]. Basically he was the only one. There were German women who would come in and clean up our soldiers’ places, make their beds.
Q: Was there much fraternizing going on between the German women and the soldiers?
A: There was some. We had one Jewish boy who was a tough little New Yorker, a young New York Jew, and he was going to reinstitute some Jewish blood into Germany. We had German women who had not had intercourse without condoms, so he used to cut the end off the condom [laughter].
Q: That was his way?
A: He said he was going to reintroduce some Jewish blood into Germany. I don't know whether they did or didn't, but he tried.
Q: But he tried, that was his goal. Since we know that the Holocaust has certainly a great deal to do with the Jewish affliction, have your feelings towards Jews changed? Did you have any feeling before or after or what is the situation today?
A: The only thing that was a problem for me was to understand anti-Semitism, because I grew up in Salt Lake City and there it never did exist. When the first Jewish people came there, they were given an old Mormon building to use.
There weren't really too many Jews living in 1914-15. The governor of Utah was a Jew. Simon Bamberger, the mayor of Salt Lake City, was a Jew. Lou Marcus, the chairman of the County Commission, was a Jew. There were very few Jewish people there so there was no such thing as anti-Semitism in Salt Lake City. Now I think this worked to the disadvantage for the Jewish religion, because there's nothing like persecution to keep the group together.
Q: Too bad you have to think of it in those terms.
A: But the Reform just quit going to their...and the Conservative became Reformed and the Orthodox disappeared entirely. I could remember the Orthodox. We had some Orthodox Jews we met there and they fought every rule there was. I don’t think we had any of the ones that had the curls there.
Q: Hassidim...
A: Hassidim. I don't think we had any of those there, but I remember one Orthodox. You couldn't even borrow his truck on the Sabbath to use. Even his truck could not work on the Sabbath, but every one of his children were real Orthodox Jews. Most of the Jews were from east Poland and were not Orthodox, so I'm sure the Orthodox Congregation disappeared out of Salt Lake City in one generation.
Q: So you are saying because of the way you were raised, anti-Semitism was an unfamiliar thing to you?
A: Totally. I never could understand it. Unto this day I can't. One of the people I work with was talking about one of the Jewish doctors. He said he was a nice guy, even if he was a Jew. This, to me, has nothing to do with it. I mean, Jews can be stinkers or they can be good, but so can the rest of us. Their religion has nothing to do with it.
Q: So you went in with that feeling and came out....
A: I had no reason to change. A lot of people think of Jews as a race and I do not, because we have had Jewish pharmacists. One of them was just as blonde as she could be because one of her grandfathers had been a rabbi in Spain during the time of the Spanish Inquisition. Remember a bunch of them went to Holland and they married the Netherlandish people there and she became blonde after two generations. But she was still a Jew and she was certainly not a Semitic Jew.
Q: She couldn't be identified with a Semitic picture of Judaism.
A: No. No way. If you go to Africa or if you go up to Morocco, you see two Moroccans -- they say one was a Jew and the other one was a Moslem. You couldn’t tell the difference because they are Semitic people, but you could tell them if you saw them by which church they went to or when they have a holiday.
Q: So this young lady couldn't be identified....
A: No, of course you can't. Neither can a Black Jew and neither can a Swedish Jew.
Q: Your background is interesting in terms of your opinion; as a Mormon and perhaps....
A:. I think Mormons were much more strong in their religion when they were being persecuted...
Q: So it's a similar pattern that you are saying between [unintelligible]. A: But they don't get it now, so they are drifting away.
Q: I would like to ask you a last question, based on a questionnaire we have here.
In terms of our project to what do you feel can be done today to try yo help eliminate the repetition of what happened?
A: I don't think you can stop it if it's going to happen. It is even worse than Holocaust what is going on in Cambodia and it will go on... There is nothing as cruel to humans as humans.
Q: Humans to humans?
A: I don’t think you are going to stop it.
Q: Having shared this material with us now, how do you feel about sharing it at an appropriate time with a friend in a social situation or with your children?
A: I don’t think I would. Q: You would not?
A.. I don't think I would. Dr. Matthews knew where I had been, so he was the one who saw [your article] and he came down and said I think you had better call because I know you were there. He said I never did tell him much about it, but he did know from what I have dropped once in a while that I was there, and he said I better call and tell them.
Q: Were you apprehensive about doing this interview with Dr. Crawford? A: Not really, because I had nothing to be...
Q: No, in terms of your own reaction to have to reflect back to this time?
A: I have reflected. Believe it or not I think about it every once in a while whether I want to or not. There is no way it will ever be erased from my mind. It's not going to make any difference what I've said now. It will not help me get rid of it; it will not make it any stronger.
Q: I am going to say something to you that I hope will make a difference to you.
Having shared this with us, it will be part of documented history. The next generation will study it, and hopefully, learn from it.
A: I don't think it's going to make any difference unfortunately.
Q: I guess we can choose to say it won't make any difference, but I would like to leave you with the feeling that it is important.
A: In lots of places in the United States, anti-Semitism is just below the surface. I know that as well as you do.
Q: Certainly.
A: I have never been able to understand it, but I know it's there. To me there are kikes and there are Jews; there are Swedes and [unintelligible]. There are Wops and there are Italians; it doesn't make any difference what group they are in there. Some you like and some you don’t.
Q: Good and bad in each.
A: Good and bad, but it has nothing to do with their religion or their race or anything else. Those religions run the gamut.
Q: You feel that this is part of human nature to be discriminatory against a minority no matter what happens?
A: Oh, Yes. Sure. If something isn't done to cut inflation the way it is so this country cannot be [unintelligible] then I think we are going to have a hard time.
Q: Do you think minorities are going to be the first to suffer again because of the political and sociological situation?
A: I think anybody that hasn’t got any money is going to suffer regardless of who they are; but I doubt very much if Jews will be picked. They will be by certain groups but I don't think they will be picked out any more than any other group because so many of the Jews have lost themselves in the....
Q: Mainstream?
A., In the Mainstream and there are some people that are considered Jews who are not and never were because of the similarity in the name or something in the appearance and they happen to be...this is where I say anti-Semitism is a little bit underneath there. I’ve heard a lot of people say, "What do you expect? He's a Jew." I happen to know he's not and never was and his family never was and, yet, because he has disagreeable characteristics that somebody doesn’t like, they say "What do you expect? He's a Jew." . Q: This is an indication that it’s under the surface.
A: With some people it’s under the surface and there isn't any way you are going to eradicate it. It was put into them when they were kids. Has to be.
Q: How?
A: Because their parents felt that way I guess.
Q: Was there any basic teaching that you felt was responsible for that? In "South Pacific" there's a song that says: You've got to learn to hate.
A: This is possibly true.
Q: You’ve got to be taught to hate is essentially what the song is.
A: There were two Jewish families in our block, and as far as we are concerned, the only difference between them and us is that they went to church on Saturday and we went on Sunday. That is the only difference.
Q: You say you were not a practicing Mormo n so to speak. I was kind of wondering whether or not that would have an effect on you in terms of forgiving the Nazis for what they perpetuated.
A: I don’t know because I don't believe in forgiveness. Q: You don't believe in forgiveness?
A: I think everybody is going to be punished for what he does. The choice is not me for forgiving. That's not my privilege.
Q: Interesting point of view. You did not come across any SS? A: Not that I knew were SS.
Q: Many of them had abandoned their camps?
A: You had to be in one of the fighting units in front to grab these guys. I saw them in the roundup places, but I never talked to them and I never had any contact with them.
Q: You had no contact with them at all.
A: The only one I can remember I really talked to was Schassberger and a couple of other people like that who were in this Hygienesche Amt.Q: So you had no contact as such?
A: I had no contact as such with these.
Q: I do want to thank you very much for givi ng me your time.
.
POST-INTERVIEW COMMENTS BY KAETHE SOLOMON:I am sitting in the car after having left Dr. Carlquist. I'm feeling a little tense about the interview. From what I can see Dr. Carlquist is not a well man and I am concerned that he will be all right after our interview. I tried to reassure him but I do have definite concerns of my own. It is very difficult to see a man go through such pain, while recording, sharing some of what he went through. There were no tears, but his body language was enough to let me know that this was not something he likes to recall or talk about.
When I offered him the brochure, I said, "I would like to leave..." and then I stopped in mid-sentence and said, "No, I do not feel that you really should have this to remind you." He said, "No, I don't want to take it; I don't want a reminder. I don't want to hear anything nor see anything about the Holocaust.” And I told me I certainly respected that feeling. But my own feeling right now is that I almost hold myself responsible for leaving a man who hopefully will have a good day the rest of the day. I'm not too sure. Dr. Carlquist also mentioned to me that his wife is not too happy about him sharing this period of his life. Once again, it seemed to be a bad time for her. They had two children there with him. He was away most of the time when she felt he should have been there and it was just a bad period for both of them, so the entire experience brings back very unpleasant memories.
