United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Leo Hanin
January 22, 1999
RG-50.549.02*0036
PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of an audio taped interview with Leo Hanin, conducted by Ginger Miles on January 22, 1999 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview took place in Los Angeles, California and is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
Interview with Leo Hanin
January 22, 1999 Beginning Tape One, Side A
Question: This is an interview with Leo Hanin, conducted by Ginger Miles, on January 22nd, 1999, in Los Angeles, California. This is a follow up interview to a United States Holocaust Memorial Museum videotape interview conducted with Leo Hanin, in 1990. The United States Holocaust Memorial Museum gratefully acknowledges Jeff and Toby Herr for making this interview possible. This is tape one, side A.
Answer: Nothing?
Q: This is one minute of silence --
A: Okay.
Q: -- in our location.
A: I have -- People, some of the people know me by four different first names. Why? How did it happen? When I was born, I was born in Lithuania, in a city called Vilnus. My parents were Orthodox Jews. They named me in Yiddish, which was -- the name was in my birth certificate, which was in Yiddish and in Polish, began with the name Labe. Labe in Yiddish means lion. It’s a typical, Jewish sounding name. So, when we came to China, I was three years old and I -- when I was about five, I went to a Russian school to study the Ru-Russian language and all the other subjects. I -- I didn’t want to say that my name was Labe, because it sounded too Jewish, with anti-Semitism and other things, I didn’t want to be outstanding. So when they asked me what my name is, I said, “My name is Lowah or Leve, which in Russian means lion. That’s how I went through the Russian school. Then, when I was 17, my -- my father told me, said -- advised me -- suggested that I go to studying in a British school in Shanghai to st -- to learn the English language, which he said is important in order to get a job, in order to go ahead in life. So I went to Shanghai, I went to the British school. I didn’t want to tell them neither my Yiddish name nor my Russian name, because it doesn’t sound good. So I said my name, I became Leo, which means, in English, lion, same thing as the other two names. And that’s how I stayed, for many, many, many years, until, in 1948, beginning of ‘49, we had to leave for Israel. When I came to Israel, I was drafted into the army and when they asked me what my name was, I said, “Leo.” They said, “Well, you have to change your name, this is not a Hebrew name.” He said, “You, from now on you will be Arie,” A-r-i-e, which in Hebrew means lion. So, that’s the same name and that’s how I stayed and I said, “I don’t want to change it any more.” When I came to America, Arie, my social security is Arie, my driver’s license is Arie, everything is Arie. Some people suggested, “Go on, change it, become Leo.” I said, “No. Enough of that.” I had some problems by the way, when I was working on my visa to come to the United States, I was in Tokyo -- I will tell you about it later. So, the -- the lady who was asking me questions, her name was Miss Bernard, in the -- in the American embassy, said, “What is this, how can one man has to have four names?” I explained to her, she says, ah, they don’t -- she didn’t -- I said, “I tell you what. I’ll bring you a letter from the Israeli embassy in Tokyo, that will say that these four names mean the same thing in different languages.” That was acceptable. And that’s it. That’s how my name was.
Q: And yet we know you as Leo?
A: Yeah. But I -- M-My documents, my checks, my social security, everything, everything I have is Arie.
Q: But do your -- What do your children call you?
A: Dad.
Q: What did your wife call you?
A: Leo. Leo, Leo, Leo. Sometimes when -- My wife also spoke Russian, it was -- it was Leve [indecipherable].
Q: So it’s all right if I call you Leo?
A: Of course it’s all right.
Q: So if -- if you don’t mind, if we could just back up a little bit and name your mother and even her maiden name.
A: Yeah.
Q: And where she was from.
A: Mm-hm.
Q: Your father and any brothers or sisters that you had.
A: Okay. My mother’s name was Rachel, her maiden name was Rachel Schwartz. She was from a small place somewhere in Uk -- in Bela -- in Belarus, in -- in -- in -- in Russia. My father’s name was Boris or Robert -- Boris, anyway, in Russian it was Boris. And my brother -- older brother, I have an older brother, his name is David. He and his family live in Nahariyya, Israel. My youngest sister, Sheelia, she lives also in Israel, in a place called Giv’atayim, which is near Tel Aviv. They have extended families, nice children, grandchildren, etcetera. Now, my children, yes? Rebecca --
Q: Before we go to your children --
A: My wife.
Q: I know although you -- you left Vilna at a very early age --
A: Three years old.
Q: Do you have any relatives remaining there?
A: No, I di -- I didn’t know. I never -- we never -- ma -- my parents never corresponded with anybody.
Q: And you nev -- so you never returned to Vilna after the war?
A: Never, oh, never, no never [indecipherable]
Q: Okay. And now let’s go to your children.
A: My children all were born in China.
Q: And your wife, of course.
A: And my wife. My wife, Rebecca, she was born in -- in China also, but not in the same place where we lived, Shanghai. She was born in Harbing, which is another city in China. Her father, who -- he died very, very young. He was a soldier in the Russian army and they lived in Siberia first, in Russia, then when he died, they moved to China. And that’s where I met her.
Q: She was Jewish also?
A: Oh yes, Russian Jewish, her background. Her name was Rebecca Lubarski, Interesting how I met her. She was a pretty young girl, about 14 or so, I was 17 or 18 and during the high holidays -- in Shanghai at that time, there was no synagogue -- during the high holidays, the Jewish community, our older people, got together and rented an apartment where they conducted the prayers for the Jewish high holidays, New Year and the Day of Atonement. And I -- I used to attend those services. At that time I was already working in an importing firm in -- they -- they gave me a job. I clerk in the office to learn the business. They were importing from England, from Germany, from Poland, textiles. Woolen textiles, there was a big market in China for textiles. And from England they imported some artificial silk, printed with beautiful red flowers. And it -- it was nice red flowers and I remember it. And then when I went to these services one day, I saw a -- a young, pretty girl in a dress with a red -- that material that we imported. That was such a surprise. And I looked at material and I said, “That’s our material.” Then I looked at her. I said to a friend of mine, I says, “That’s the girl I like to meet. I think I’m going to marry her.” And I did, six years later.
Q: Oh.
A: Was a very interesting story.
Q: Did you go over to her that day?
A: No, no, I didn’t go with her that day, I met her later in a -- in a organization for young Jewish people. We met and then I started to take her out to the movies, etcetera, etcetera, etcetera. [indecipherable]
Q: You had a courtship for --
A: Oh yes, for a long time, about six years.
Q: Six year courtship, wow.
A: I was 17. Because in 1933, or ‘34 -- ‘33, the firm that I was working for -- that’s the beginning of another series of events which brings me to Japan, you see? They send me to Japan in 1937, before the war.
Q: From?
A: China to Japan, to open an office there.
Q: With your family?
A: No, I wasn’t married yet.
Q: Okay.
A: No, wait a minute, 1936 they send me, I was married next year. ‘36 -- beginning of 1936, I went to Japan. I got married later in 1936, came back to Shanghai, married and took my wife to -- with me to Japan. The reason why the-they wanted to open an office in Japan -- it was a different Japan in those days, they started copying the British and the French textiles. They used to get samples from overseas and copy them in the Japanese factories and prices were much cheaper, so they said, “We want to import from Japan. Go to Japan, open an office.” I was only what wa -- what was it, ‘36? 19 - 13 - 23 years old. I opened an office, I decided I have to learn Japanese because I’m dealing with the Japanese. I used to get samples, which I would bring to different manufacturers and they would copy it. Then I would export this merchandise to China. And then that was -- that was that period, that was ‘36, then my -- my -- we corresponded with my girlfriend -- my -- my Rebecca and then she said, “Well, it’s about time we got married.” Whatever. So I came back to Shanghai, got married, took her with me to Japan in 1936 and continued with my job. In 1937, after nine months of marriage, my son was born. Now, my wife was a young girl, 19 - 20, she was very concerned to give birth in Japan, she didn’t know the hospitals, Japanese doctors, she was used to her mama, you know. And mama was in Shanghai. So she told me, “I’m going to go back to Shanghai to give birth to our child.” I said, “Well, if that’s the way you feel,” I wa -- she was afraid, I said, “Okay.” I send her to Japan and there our es -- our son is -- early in 1937, March 29th, was born. She was in Shanghai, I was in Japan. And that’s -- And that comes another very interesting cycle in my life. Always in ways, my life is cycles. I was -- Because that brings me to -- to the Fuguclan. You know the book Fuguclan, you read it, didn’t you? Oh, the story of the jap -- of the Jewish refugees in Japan, what I was doing there. You know about that, don’t you? If not, there is an article here.
Q: I want you to -- to tell about it here.
A: Well, we’ll come back to this. I used to go to a small restaurant to eat over there, in Kovay, in Japan, 1937. And I needly -- I knew mostly all the foreigners that live at that time in Kovay, was a small city. Small, foreigner communities, some British, some American, some Germans, etcetera, etcetera. And I knew by face and by acquaintance, mostly all of them. I belong to the clubs, you know. So, I used to go to the small Japanese restaurant called Kovay kitchen. And I was there, one day I see new faces. Never seen these people before in my life, they are in Japan. It really was very rare that foreigners would come in those days, first of all. In those days you had no planes, you had to go by boat and as -- it was --
Q: Was there a Jewish community in Kovay?
A: A very small Jewish community which was established in 1939, two years later, I’ll tell you about this.
Q: But not when you came?
A: Not when I came.
Q: Okay.
A: There was a synagogue wh-which I attended. I used to be quite religious.
Q: There was a synagogue when you came?
