United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Israel Ipson
December 3, 1995
RG-50.030*0382 PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a taped interview with Israel Ipson, conducted on December 3, 1995 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
Israel Ipson
December 3, 1995
A:Okay. My name is Israel Ipson. I've been born in Lithuanian in 1911, March 15th, 1911. And my father was a worker, worked in the brewery. The brewery was in Slobodka. Why is it the brewery was in a place in Slobodka? You know, the Lithuanians didn't want to have the industry, what coming up, to the Lithuanians, that they should have it. The Jews were not allowed to go to work in Kovno, which Kovno was the capital city of Lithuania, so we had to go to work in Slobodka. Slobodka was a suburb. In Slobodka lives around 10,000 Jews. Mostly the poor. They didn't have nothing to eat, and it was a pity. For where I come from a very, very poor family. My grandfather worked in the brewery with Golswolf Ingleman (ph). My father worked in the brewery. My unclealmost everybody in the poor Jews in Lithuanian worked for the brewery. Why? The owner from the brewery was the Wolfs, Wolf brothers. There were six brothers. The family were the Wolfs, and they were a very philanthropic family. And they support the Jews. How? They build the brewery, and everybody almost work for the brewery. They also invent a timeused to be a time where full of snowing. In Lithuanian is a lot of full of snow, and they used to be covered up and drowned in snow. Was sending in with horses for the brewery to get the people, bring them back to the place of work. That's how heavy the snow it was. And my father was liked by the brewmeister (ph). The brewmeister was a German from Bavaria, and he was his helper. Anythingthe war got to benow my father used to do in the brewery, the brewmeister done only sit and got the taste of the beer, the color. I remember father used toI used to bring my father lunch every day. My mother used to send me potato sweet herring. It would want that my father should be thirsty, be able to drink the beer and save the tune for the beer, they call it. And the pilsner and all the names, they funny. And it's the way the poor Jews in Slobodka, they make their living. Later on when Lithuania become an independent nation run by a school teacher, or the name Smetona, he gave the Jews more right. What he done, he brought the Jews away from the brewery. The brewery was filled with , but it opened up more industries to the Lithuanians to make him happy. Smetona was a smartverywas such a nice man. Tried to help also the Jews to participate in the industry. It shouldn't be any fights between the Jews and the Lithuanians, try to avoid it. But still after, there's still was plenty bad feeling between one and the other. And what has happened, the biggest problem I think what it was, the Lithuanians start taking outthe German took the Lithuanian out and send them to camps to work. They also, the Russians, the communists, was being picked, like the school teachers, manufacturers, the richer element of people, they used to be sent to Siberia, blaming them for the things which not happened. But also the Jews didn't knew nothing about it, but they should be saying that the Jews kill their own, that take no other Lithuanians to Siberia. Siberia was athe camp, a labor camp. It is a very, very, very miserable place to be. But mostly 90 percent from the people who be sent to Siberia been dead because they didn't seem to come back alive.
Question: What era are you talking about right now?
A:Siberia.
Q:When you're talking about the Germans and the communists, what year are you talking?
A:Oh, it was in 1941.
Q:You're talking later?
A:Right.
Q:Okay. Let's go back a little. And I want to ask you a little bit more about your family life as a boy, your religious background.
A:Oh, I see.
Q:Just the lifestyle in Slobodka.
A:Right. Well, I was also came in time when we didn't have any telephones; we didn't have any lights. I used to go in school they call it. What was theever was the old person, knowledgeable, been pitching for pay to the boys to go to hayda (ph), we used to call it. And at the hayda we used to come in and stay there until, in wintertime, 7:00, 8:00 o'clock at night until it get dark and bring them home. And that was our education to people. Like my wife was just saying, she speaks good Jewish, the Jewish language. The Jewish language was a language from childhood you got it up. And I had two rabbis, because one rabbi was the Hebrew language, another was Jewish. And then we had in Slobodka a rabbinical seminary. The biggest rabbinical seminary in the world, because in that time, in 1914,17, the only thing they knew is to learn the bible. The people was poor. There was nothing to eat. They were sitting there all day long in the seera (ph), they call it, it is a rabbinical seminary. And people from all over the world would be sending their youth to that seminary in Slobodka. It was not only later onthe later years grew up, it was with their also young kids been going there to teach to become a rabbi. But it is reallythe big leaving to be a rabbi at that time, they couldn't do nothing. They couldn't make it. But they been supported by the American people, even in World`War`I. They already been sending help to the Jews in Slobodka. The chief rabbis used to come in here and in speeches speaking through the American Jew to help the Jews in Slobodka, because all it be these weddings used to come between rabbis andand then the rabbi had a daughter who had got to get married, used to take along with him the comment of a trip to America and findgo to the seera to pick a boka (ph), to pick a learning young man that they should get married and been supported by the Jews in America. It was a tradition to help the orthodox. And it is still right now in Slobodka. The seera is in existence now in Israel. They know more in Slobodka, but after the war they move the chief rabbi, moved him to Israel.
Q:So your boyhood was very involved with religious learning and
A:Right. And then I wasafter the learning, the religious learning, I went in high`school. It became the Jews decided to open up a hipper (ph) high`school. And it became the Germans in 1917 they had a lot of educated people in the army and they decided to stay in Lithuanian to teach us, and then we had enough people to get a private school going. And it was like one famous teacher, Karlbah (ph), and hein his name was created a high`school, and it called Karlbah . And then we had also in the Russian language a high`school. And we had in Lithuanian we had three high`schools. And then we had the orthodox school was in Kovno. And everybody been happy until Hitler come to being.
Q:Okay. Whattell me a little bit about your family. Did you have brothers and sisters?
A:I haveI had two sistersdidn't have any brothersand they perished in the Holocaust. And one was married, and the other one was still a girl. She was married, but she was a famoushow you call it? Painting. She was a oil painting. She had a name. They ask her to come to Paris, and she was staying for three months in Paris and learning the painting guys. She come back with the famous paint pieces and all that stuff.
Q:Do you have memories of your family life together?
A:Oh, I have, yeah.
Q:Nice family life?
A:Very nice. Well, we been all together until I married. I was staying home with my parents. And my father, he was a orthodox Jew, and everythingwe used to come to holidays. We took it together, like the Passover holidays, the high holidays, and we been meet together. Everybody would come. And the womanit was orthodox fashion, the prayer separate. They have a separation between men and woman. But that reminds me different moments that theyI don't know what you call it. A helper who helps the synagogue. Summis (ph), is that how you call it? Hell. I'll have to skip it. I don't know how to say in English. They call them a specialused to go out on every Friday night and say, "Jews, you got to close the stores. There's all this coming around. Don't do any business anymore." So someone got to stop them, and they used to stop it. But everything was fine until 2042 when the war started with Hitler and Stalin and Churchill. I used to like to listen to the shortwave radio. And the Jews which was locked up in the ghetto, we used to come to my place where I lived to hear what's going on in the fronts. Well, how is Hitler doing? Well, Hitler is winning the war or losing the war? And we was very interested in this. They come from my working place, which was the airport, and talking till the group, which used to come to listen to me, what's happened on the front, how Hitler is doing. And they used to come up. To explain the truth, I was already scared. They could lock me up and find out about it, because if you were a Kraut. And I be begging them they shouldn't come no more, becauseand Ithey didn't have a place nowhere to go, and they stillI said, "Tell them it's very important." And they were very interested, like they would be generals, they used to tell me. One would sit here this way and one would sit that way, and they knew what they were talking about and they been leading the war.
Q:Okay. Let'sI don't want to get quite there yet. I still want a few more questions about before the war began; okay?
