United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Sol Sorrin
October 11, 1994
RG-50.030*0284
PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a videotaped interview with Sol Sorrin, conducted by Joan Ringelheim on October 11, 1994 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview took place in Washington, DC and is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
SAUL SORRIN PRIVATE
October 11, 1994
Abstract Saul Sorrin, born on New York’s Lower East Side in 1919, had a physical exemption from World War II military service, and worked instead in the Treasury Department’s Procurement Division.
In early 1946, the fluent Yiddish-speaker began working as a supply officer for UNRRA (United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration) in German DP camps, beginning with Neu Freimann where the health conditions were “desperate.” When Eisenhower visited, the 25-year-old Sorrin told him, “General, the situation's tragic.” Soon Sorrin helped create health programs, feeding programs, and schools. “Right away, the Jews were energetic. They set up everything they needed…” Sorrin became director of Neu Freimann in 1947, when it had 3,000-3,500 residents. Later he became director of Foehrenwald, one of the biggest DP camps in Germany, designed for about 3,000 people, but housing perhaps 4,000. He left Foehrenwald in 1950.
He discusses the many difficulties Jewish refugees faced in emigrating, including General Patton’s declaration that to emigrate to the U.S. from the American zones of Germany and Austria, refugees had to prove that they had arrived before December 22, 1945; and the national origin quotas for Poles, Lithuanians, Latvians; in addition to the restrictive quotas for United States and Canada.
He divulges that in some cases, documents were destroyed and new ones were fabricated to surmount such barriers.
He says he still is troubled by some decisions he made, like not turning in a survivor who had bought a car illegally and crashed into people, possibly killing one. Sorrin helped the man escape to Palestine.
Sorrin did not intervene in the thriving black markets because he felt Jews’ participation was justified as the only way to provide the means for their survival and support.
He calls the refugees “the phoenix rising out of the ashes of European Jewry. And they have gone on to produce great things, both here and in Israel.”
Tape 1
01:00:11 Q: Saul, can you tell me your full name, where you were born and when?
A: My name is Saul, S-a-u-l, Sorrin, S-o-r-r-I-n. I was born in New York in 1919.
Q: What month?
A: July 6.
Q: 1919. Where in New York, in Manhattan?
A: Born in Manhattan, the Lower East Side of Manhattan. And we moved to the Bronx, up the socio-economic scale. And I went to school in the Bronx, DeWitt Clinton High School, and I went to City College.
Q: What did you study?
A: Anything which did not equip me to make a living. And then toward the end of the depression, I got out of school and I had to get a job. And the federal government was then in the process of expanding its operations that were -- Roosevelt was seeing, you know, trouble in Europe. And I got a job in the Treasury Department. This is a long time ago. I recall that I was in the Procurement Division, that is, they were buying paper and supplies and other materials to be used by the federal government and by the military. And it was an important job. I mean, we kept -- I remember going to the White House even, in about 1942 or something to talk to them about some paper they had ordered, etc. I did have a sense that I was doing something important, you know. But I was exempted from the military because I had some physical problem which I've never really gotten through. It's not life threatening, but it was enough to get me exempted. And then, you know, when the war was over
Q: Let me interrupt for a moment. What did you know about what was going on in Europe in terms of national security?
A: Not very much, really. We knew that the Jews were being mistreated and there were massacres. That information reached us through the mass media. And we knew it was a war for democracy to survive. And it had this Jewish component, which I felt very strongly about. And so at the end of the war -- and I don't remember the name of the people -- it was somebody who worked for a congressman in Washington who approached me and said, you know, UNRRA is looking for people to work in their program. UNRRA had two programs after the war. They had a program for refugees, and they had a program for countries which had suffered at the hands of the Axis.
01:03:22 There the country programs were designed to ship goods, needed goods, to strengthen -- to begin the pouring of life blood into the economy. There was a big program in Poland. Some in Italy. None in Germany, and, of course, the very big one in the Far East, China. Which really attracted me, you know. I wanted to go someplace, and I asked for China. And then, one day, I was at the University of Maryland after I had been accepted -- and it was sort of touch and go, because of my health problems with the military, but I made it. And I was now at the University of Maryland getting briefed, educated on the whole program. And somebody from UNRRA headquarters came over to speak to us. And he said to me, "Why are you going to China?" I really didn't have a good reason, you know, except I wanted to see that part of the world. And he said, "You come from New York. Do you speak Yiddish?" and I said, "Yes, I do speak Yiddish." And he said, “You must go -- our people -- he was Jewish, too -- are in desperate trouble over there.” And they were, you know, after the war. And we need Yiddish speaking staff. And I want you to go." And I went. And I was trained for just about a month. We had seminars and all the rest, and I took off.
Q: What was the preparation like? What was the training like?
A: Well, first of all, they told us structurally what the program was about, who supplied what, and what was the chain of responsibility. In Germany, the principal responsibility for refugee programs lay with the military. And they were very unwilling participants in the program. They didn’t want -- "We're not welfare workers. And we’re not --” You know, some of the things which were being said. They had no taste for it. Refugees are a terrible pain in the behind in getting in the way of the movement of troops and materiel, and they just distract the military from its principal mission. And so now UNRRA was designated to work as the agency of the occupation forces in Germany, Italy, Austria, running these camps. Staffed UNRRA by international personnel, people -- United Nations agency, therefore, the people were drawn from Western powers, you know, France, the Benelux countries. We had a Swiss on my team, and Americans. And so we learned about that chain of command and some of the problems. By the way, they really didn't know too much about the problems. There was a great dissociation between what was happening in the field and what these people knew in the national headquarters. And that’s a constant difficulty.
01:06:26 And then we took off. And we -- I remember I went on the Gripsholm. I was put aboard with a group of UNRRA people. Gripsholm, which had been during the war, an exchange ship for diplomats. It is not the present-day Gripsholm. There are new Gripsholms. And this Gripsholm was a real rat trap. During the war, it had exchanged diplomatic people, Japanese from the United States to Japan, etc., and reverse. And I spent ten seasick days on the Gripsholm. And I think we came into Cherbourg, and from Cherbourg by train to Paris. And there we stayed in Paris for two or three weeks getting more briefings. And then came the day they say, "You are off.” And I was sent by train to Munich on the Orient-Express, but it was not that fabulous Orient-Express. And in Munich, I was immediately whisked as the supply officer for UNRRA team, I think it was 560 if I am not mistaken, outside of Munich. Shall I go on? There was a camp there which had just been established, I think in December of '45. I arrived about February, something like that. I don't remember. In the early part of the year. It was the winter.
Q: 1946?
A: '46. And a camp had been established by General McNarney, who was Eisenhower's successor as the SHAEF (Supreme Headquarters Allies Expeditionary Force) commander or something.
01:08:06 And they had evacuated a whole zedlum (ph) silek? of settlements of small bungalows, I think about 250 such houses, which had been sold by the Nazis, built by the Nazis, for German workers, defense industry workers and their families. Two or three, bed -- two bedrooms apiece, and downstairs was a kitchen. It was in the 1930s style. There was no gas in these stoves. For example, the stoves were fed with, and the heat was created by, use of firewood. But it was nice. I mean, until we began to stuff the people who were coming in, into these places. More than -- you would say in each house, if you had 250 houses, you had four or five people. That would have been maybe 1200 people, but we had as much as 3,000 at one time.
01:09:05 And it was beyond its capacity. When I arrived, and the Jews who came into that camp were infiltrees (infiltrators?) . They were not, by and large, survivors of concentration camps. It is estimated, I have read estimates, figures -- accurate figures are very, very difficult to come by. There was so much disorganization. -- that there were no more than 35,000 Jewish concentration camp survivors in Germany and Austria. And this camp in Munich was very close to Dachau. And most, many of the survivors that we got were Dachau survivors. The Germans had tried to destroy -- there was a plan to march all of the haftling, the concentration camp people from Dachau to a quarry, a big quarry, down south near the Austrian border, which, I understand, had been prepared with explosives. And to march them into this quarry and then blow the whole thing up. But the 3rd Army was approaching and at a certain critical moment, the Germans decided they weren't going to risk the arrival of the Americans, and they simply dropped the whole project. Left the Jews where they were standing and took off. And, Dachau had also what is described as “aussencommandos” that is, branches of Dachau where Jews were sent in various villages and towns in what’s called Oberbayern, that is Southern Bavaria, to work as farmers on farmland under the supervision of the owners. Or in some cases, in factories, or some cases, directly in Dachau. But, so we had a lot of Jews scattered over the landscape between Munich and the Austrian border. Little towns like Mittenwalde, which is a famous violin town, had Jews working there in various jobs. And they suffered, you know, they were not fed well. They were beaten, whatever. But it was not an extermination center. So, those people came into Munich, a lot of them, and many of them, stayed in those towns. And we would reach out to them from our headquarters in Munich. Anyway, this camp was just recently set up, and most of the people who were infiltrees who came in from Poland, from eastern Europe. Jews who may have, who were mostly in the Soviet Union during the war.
01:12:00 And I think Jewish agencies, important Jewish agencies, like the JDC (Joint Distribution Committee) and HIAS (Hebrew Immigrant Aid Society), and the Jewish Agency for Palestine became voluntary agencies under the supervision of UNRRA, who were to assign some of their people, welfare workers and others to our teams, to help the international personnel administer the camp and to provide services.
