United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with John Dolibois
May 11, 2000
RG-50.030*0408 PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a taped interview with Ambassador John Dolibois, conducted on May 11, 2000 in Washington, DC on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview is part of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum's collection of oral testimonies. Rights to the interview are held by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
JOHN DOLIBOIS
May 11, 2000
Beginning Tape One
Question: Good morning, Ambassador Dolibois, it’s a very nice to have you here in Washington.
Answer: Thank you, it’s a pleasure to be here.
Q: Tell me, what was your full name at birth.
A: Well, actually, it was Jean, J-e-a-n. Jean Ernest Dolibois, pronounced Dolibois in Luxembourg because it is a -- a French name. My father is Parisian -- Parisian ancestry, so in -- in Europe it’s Dolibois. But Dolibois like Illinois in the United States, it makes it a lot easier, so that’s just a -- but a -- when I became naturalized, I paid a dollar extra for the naturalization fee, to change the Jean, J-e-a-n, which would be pronounced Jean, to John, J-o-h-n. So at least my first name is still a -- Americanized.
Q: And tell me what year you were born and where in Luxembourg you were born.
A: I was born in Luxembourg City, actually a s-s -- the suburb Bonava, of Luxembourg City, on the avenue -- on the Rue de Chicago, predestination apparently. And the -- I was born on December fourth, 1918. My -- was immediately after -- shortly after the signing of the armistice and I was born the youngest of eight children. Unfortunately my mother died 10 days later. So my oldest sister Marie had to step in and -- and play the role of my mother. And she actually raised me. In fact, up until the day she died, I called her mom, you know, she was -- al-although she was my sister.
Q: That’s interesting.
A: But she actually is involved in my coming to the United States as an immigrant. I don’t know if you want to hear that --
Q: Yeah, I do, I do, yes, I kn --
