United States Holocaust Memorial MuseumPRIVATE Interview with Flory Jagoda
August 10, 1995
RG-50.030*0342
PREFACE The following oral history testimony is the result of a videotaped interview with Flory Jagoda, conducted by Joan Ringelheim on August 10, 1995 on behalf of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. The interview took place in Arlington, Virginia and is part of the United States Holocaust Research Institute's collection of oral testimonies.
The reader should bear in mind that this is a verbatim transcript of spoken, rather than written prose. This transcript has been neither checked for spelling nor verified for accuracy, and therefore, it is possible that there are errors. As a result, nothing should be quoted or used from this transcript without first checking it against the taped interview.
FLORY JAGODA
August 10, 1995
01:00:05
Q: Good afternoon, Flory. Can you please tell me your full name and where you were born.
A: My name is Flory Jagoda, and I was born in Sarajevo, Bosnia. You want to know when? I don't think I should tell youDecember 21st, 1923. A lot of years. Actually, most of the survivors are this age, maybe a little younger, a little older. But this is more or less around 70s and so. And they have one thing in commonsilence. They sort of don't like to talk. We don't like toit is almost like a wound that, you know, you heal. And you don't want to scratch it. It bleeds. And also, a lot of them do not want to burden their families, especially their children, with sadness. They want to forget. And it works for a while. You have children, and you have weddings, and grandchildren, and music lessons, and piano lessons. And I was teaching music myself for 25 years. So I was quite a busy lady. Then all of a sudden, children leave, and marry, and get a little older. And you know, you don't sleep. You sort of start dreaming, and seeing some images and faces of your familyand, uh, you wake up in the morning disturbed and restless. And, uh, then you read these horrible storiesthere was no holocaustnever happenedand you know what that means to a survivorno holocaust? Your whole inner starts screaming. I think the ageand I also think the story of the holocaust never happenedisI think it broke the silence of a lot of holocaust survivors. Age definitely had something to do with it. So here I am. I'm going to take you to a small little town in Bosnia, and share with you my childhood.
01:02:48 Actually, I'm not going to start in Sarajevo. We will go about 98 kilometers up northeast Bosnia, a small town called Vlasenica, very picturesque. It's know for its pine trees. My whole family lived there. Their name was Altarac, the Altarac family. And they were very proud of their name. It meant __________, the high placevery proud of that. And, you know, all these towns that you read today unfortunately, from Srebenica to Rogatica to, which is close to Gorazde, to Travnik, to Zvornikall these little, tiny towns hadbesides Moslems and Serbs, they also had a Bosnian Sephardi Jewish communities. A lot of people don't know thatBosnian JewsLos Judeos Bosnia, they would say in Ladino. And they came from Sarajevo. Actually, they were descendants of the Spanish refugees that were expelled from Spain in 1492the inquisitionSpain and Portugal. The word Sepharad means Iberian peninsula in Hebrew.
01:04:32 Actually, they had no choice. I mean, they had to leave, or convert to Catholicism, or leave home. They were given three months. A lot of them converted. A lot of them remained. They couldn't leave the country they really loved. My ancestors went towards Turkey. There sultan Bayazid II gave orders tothroughout his Ottoman Empireto let the refugees in, give them freedom, to worship, to build synagogues, and, most of all, freedom to travel through his Ottoman Empire. So there were big communities in Salonika, Greece, BulgariaSarajevo definitely became a thriving Sephardi community. They called it a _________ Yirushaliam, the small Jerusalem, with their religious schools andso, from Sarajevo, looking for new opportunities, they went to these small towns and villages that you read about today.
01:05:53 Now the life in Vlasenicait was a very simple life. The family was very close nit, about 15 families, 15, 16, familiesmost of them, Altarac families. And in my family, definitely, the leader was my nona (ph.), my grandmother. My nona was a kind of a grandmother that a child dreams of having, not because onlyI mean, her voice was something that was unbelievable. She sang beautifully. But she was a midwife, a well known midwife, in all the neighboring villages, she knew herbs. Her house was always full of women with babies and children"What do I give to this one?" "What do I""What herb do I use?" . She was the one to put the first pair of earrings through the babies' ears. And naturally, she was the leader of her own band, as we say in Americaleader of the band. She had her own singing family, which was well known as the Altarac family, the singing Altarac family, five daughters and three sons. She was the teacher of religion in the house. Women did not go to the synagogue as much as we see here. The men usually went to synagogue, took their sons, taught them Hebrew. And the woman stayed at home, and she taught her daughters and granddaughters tradition, religion, heritage. All that she learned from her nona, and her bis-nona, the great grandmother, just went on from generation to generation.
01:07:49 They lived there for about four centuries, and the old peacefully died, and the young were born and married, and there was harmony in Vlasenicathe Moslems and Serbs and Jews lived in harmony there. I never remember hate or quarrels. The women visited and the children went to school together. I would never, never, never, believe that the madness of the Second World War would bring something.
