Interview with Witold Pawlikowski
January 21, 2015
Question: Good morning.
Answer: Morning.
Q: This is a United Hol – States Holocaust Memorial Museum interview with Mr. Witold Pawlikowski, on January 21st, 2015, in Arlington Heights, Illinois. And thank you very much, Mr. Paliko – Pawlikowski for agreeing to speak with us today, to share memories of your life and childhood in Poland, and the experiences that you went through with your family. We very much appreciate your willingness to do so.
A: My pleasure.
Q: We’re going to start at the beginning. I’m going to ask a number of questions about your childhood, and what your memories are pre-war, and then we’ll go on from there. So my first question is, what was your name at birth?
A: Witold Julian Pawlikowski.
Q: Okay. And your date of birth?
A: May 5th, 1931.
Q: And where were you born?
A: In Lódz, Poland, which is a – a city, industrial city 180 kilometers southwest of Warsaw.
Q: How many kilom –
A: 180 kilometers.
Q: Okay, 180 kilometers southwest. Did you have brothers and sisters?
A: No.
Q: You’re an only child.
A: Only child.
Q: Can you tell me, what was your mother’s name and your father’s name?
A: My mother was Sabina. Her maiden name was Majewski(ph).
Q: Okay.
A: And my father was Wazlow(ph) Pawlikowski.
Q: Wazlow(ph) Pawlikowski?
A: Yes.
Q: Do you have any earliest memories from your childhood, even if they might be vague?
A: Well, I suppose when – it – it started when – when we moved back from the villages, because my father was a teacher. So, several first years o-of his career were spent in the villages outside of the city.
Q: Were you with him, you and your mother?
A: Yes, I have a picture of myself on a horse. Well, the horse is about this size. So – but I do not remember that, because –
Q: Okay. Do you – do you remember how you lived and where you lived in the villages?
A: Apparently we lived in – in – in the – around the huts, but I do not remember the hut. I don’t –
Q: Was your – was your father by profession a teacher?
A: Yes.
Q: Okay, di – was it grade school, or middle school, or all of it? What was his subject?
A: It was gra-grade school.
Q: Grade school teacher?
A: Yes.
Q: Okay. And tell me a little bit about his family background. Did you know – did you have an extended family of aunts and uncles and grandparents and so on?
A: Well, my – my grandparents had three children; my father and a bro – and his brother and his sister.
Q: Was he the youngest or the oldest?
A: He was the youngest, and her sister was married, and her brother was not.
Q: Your father’s brother?
A: My father’s brother –
Q: – brother was not married.
A: – was – was not married, and he was killed during the war, with no family left.
Q: Oh, I see. And how did this happen?
A: He was taken into a camp and just gone.
Q: Died there?
A: But – but I don’t know the details, I – I never had the chance to talk, because when I came to po – when I went to Poland back, in 1979, the grandparents were both dead, so I could not talk to them.
Q: And do you know what camp he was taken to?
A: No.
Q: Was it by the Germans?
A: Yes, by the Germans.
Q: By the Germans. Do you think that –
A: Bu – because when Germans came in, they occupied that part of Poland, all the way to the cuz – Curzon Line, that – and the Soviet Union came from the other side, of course.
Q: And was there a reason why he had been arrested that – that you knew of?
